Adiabatic compression and expansion of gases changes their temperature
as well as their pressure, so every sound wave generates local
temperature oscillations.  Sound waves in air can reach a few
megahertz over meter-like distances and much higher amplitudes than we
are commonly used to, up to nearly an atmosphere even at atmospheric
pressure, and higher amplitudes still at higher pressures.  Let's
consider a sinusoid.

Normally the oscillation of pressure, volume, and temperature is
almost perfectly in phase; especially at high frequencies, the hot
compressed gas has time to lose only a tiny amount of heat through
radiation or conduction before it's being decompressed and thus
cooled, and once cold it has time to gain only a tiny amount of heat
by absorbing radiation or conduction before the cycle starts again.
In a traveling wave, 90° out of phase to this oscillation of volume
(and, to a very good approximation, temperature and pressure, XXX no
that's exactly backwards), is an oscillation of displacement.
Assuming no overall movement, a parcel of air passes its equilibrium
position when it is either maximally small or maximally large.
Suppose the wave is moving to the right.  When it is maximally small,
the parcel is moving at its peak velocity to the right; when it is
maximally large, it is moving at its peak velocity to the left.
Halfway in between, when its pressure is changing fastest, its
velocity is zero, but its displacement is at its maximum.

That is, the velocity oscillation in the direction of wave travel is
180° out of phase with the volume oscillation (and, to an excellent
approximation, pressure and temperature, XXX no that's exactly
backwards); the velocity oscillation in the direction opposite wave
travel is in perfect phase with the volume oscillation.  The
displacement oscillation lags the velocity oscillation by 90°: the
displacement in the direction of wave travel is at its maximum when
the volume is at its equilibrium level and is expanding most rapidly,
and at its minimum (moving at maximum speed in the *opposite*
direction from wave travel) when the volume is at its equilibrium
level and is *contracting* most rapidly.

Because the displacement is almost exactly 90° out of phase with the
temperature, there is no tendency to transfer heat preferentially in
either direction.  When a parcel 

Now, if we have some liquid or solid particles suspended in the air,
such as fine dust, they will move with it — effectively increasing its
density by a bit — but will not be subject to the same adiabatic
heating and cooling, since their volume changes with pressure orders
of magnitude less than the air's does, basically a rounding error in
this context.  They will change temperature, but only because they are
exchanging heat with the air they are suspended in.  This will cause
the temperature oscillation to lag the pressure variation a little,
with the result that the volume variation (PV = nRT, thus P = nRT/V)
will not be precisely 180° out of phase with either of them, but a
little bit in between.  This 

thermoacoustics

cauliflower heat exchangers

powder bed adsorption

H-bridge

bubbly liquids
