YouTube keeps recommending me fringe-science videos with catastrophist
theories of history, positing the existence of prehistoric
high-technology civilizations terminated by a Younger Dryas impact
event.  I decided to watch one entitled, “[Evidence for Ancient High
Technology - Part 1: Machining][0]”.

[0]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6KUDu40BC5o

Sawing stone blocks
-------------------

After the author, who goes by “UnchartedX” or “Ben”, spends 21 minutes
complaining about how Wikipedia and the archaeological establishment
are suppressing the theories he favors so they won’t lose tenure†, in
between deprecating “savages”, he finally gets to explaining some
actual arguments.  He points out that some basalt blocks at what he
says is the Old Kingdom Egypt site of [Abusir][1] are sawn: the cut
surface has striations or grooves on it, with a characteristic spacing
of a few millimeters and a height typically under a millimeter, and
the block was broken off after being sawn most of the way through,
showing that the kerf was a few millimeters thick.  He says that it
has “clearly been cut by a blade with a very distinctive circular arc
to it”, but to me the striations look straight.  He claims that the
striations imply a “rapid rate of cutting”, which I don’t think
follows at all; he doesn’t explain why he thinks this.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abusir

He says that the radius of the curvature of the striations suggests a
circular saw of 8 or 9 meters.

(In passing it’s worth noting that, while Abusir does have
Fifth-Dynasty Old-Kingdom pyramids, from around 2400 BCE, it also has
the remains of a Ramesside temple from only about 1250 BCE, during the
New Kingdom.  Ben doesn’t mention why he thinks these blocks are from
the Old Kingdom.)

To me it seems more likely that the cuts were made with an abrasive
“wire saw”, as is commonly done in quarrying today, rather than a
circular saw; but probably using plant-fiber cord, thin wood boards,
or copper wire or sheet, to move the abrasive sand through the cut,
since steel cable and synthetic diamond were unavailable.  Quarrying
stone with plant-fiber ropes, water, and sand is a well-documented
technology in recent centuries, and could easily date back to the
Neolithic.  The block seems to be about a meter across, and a
meter-long piece copper wire seems more likely to me than a circular
saw of 8 or 9 meters in diameter.  It would produce the observed kind
of striations, but of course without a very consistent radius.

[Wikipedia explains that abrasive sawing is the mainstream theory for
how the Egyptians cut granite blocks][4], citing among other things
Denys Stocks’s 2003 book on the subject.  I wonder why Ben doesn’t
mention this, or indeed abrasive cable sawing at all.  He does say,
“Until barely 100 years ago, the technique used in the field to cut
through granite was far different, and far more primitive,” talking
about wedge-wetting.

[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_pyramid_construction_techniques

He points out that most of the blocks at the site do not have such
striations, suggesting that they were polished smooth, which is
clearly a thing that the Egyptians did with stone (see below about
flatness).

[5]: https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/egypt/dispatches/99032102.html
[6]: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=IGx10rUAAAAJ&hl=en

The standard sawing technology for millennia has been a bow saw or
bucksaw, where the blade is held in tension by a frame with some
levers, usually tensioned with a twisted pair of ropes; although, with
the recent advent of cheaper, stiffer, and harder steels, it’s become
common to use blades that are just cut from sheet metal, often with
the stiffness of the blade itself enabling the saw to be pushed
through the cut.  Even today you use a bow saw or hacksaw with an
abrasive wire blade to cut materials that are too hard for metals to
cut.

He points out that at [Giza][3] (Fourth Dynasty, Old Kingdom) there
are stone blocks with similar saw marks that run only partway through
the stone.  To me some of these cuts are distinctly curved rather than
planar, which is easy to achieve with a wire saw but very difficult
with a circular saw — you’d have to make the saw blade accurately
spherical (or cylindrical, like a hole saw or core drill) rather than
a flat disc.  Indeed, somewhat later he points out a sawn granite
block at Abu Rawash whose surface is visibly concave, which to my mind
clearly demonstrates that it was cut with something like a cable saw
or bucksaw, not a circular saw.

[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giza_pyramid_complex

You would think that if the Egyptians had 9-meter-diameter circular
saws for cutting huge blocks with, they would also make much smaller
saws for making the smaller cuts, which would leave circular
striations with a much smaller radius as they moved through the cut.

Stocks, who doesn’t seem to have one of the academic positions so
scorned by Ben, [actually went to Egypt to try out abrasive cutting
with copper tools][5]; he has [some 16 other academic publications
from 1986 to 2013 on such subjects][6] in addition to his 2003 book.
Most of them are in the academic journals that won’t accept Ben’s
work.  However, Stocks doesn’t seem to be in favor of the cable-saw
theory, instead advocating the use of 6-mm-thick copper sheets to
drive the abrasive, using no lubricant — not only because water
increased wear on his reed tube drills, but also because it slowed
cutting in his tests with both saws and tube drills, rather than
speeding it, and was more inconvenient to remove; however, it is known
that the later Minoans used water or oil lubricants for abrasive
cutting of stone with reeds.  Ben attacks the copper-blade approach as
impractical, I think rightly so — a cable saw would be more efficient,
cheaper, and produce similar markings.

† This suggests that Ben doesn’t know what “tenure” actually is,
seriously impairing his ability to understand the motivations of the
opponents he demonizes.

Core-drilling stone
-------------------

Ben makes much of spiral grooves found in cores drilled out of stone
using core drills, saying these are “machining marks not explainable
by the tools and techniques in the archaeological record”.  [Wikipedia
claims that core drills date to 3000 BCE in Egypt][2], so he seems to
be in accordance with the “establishment” he so bitterly attacks.  He
even shows a museum tag saying, “UC.44985: Basalt tube drill core from
enlarged hole.  *Tools & Weapons*, LII, 61; p.45. ?Dyn. IV,” so I
guess he knows this is already the mainstream theory.  Nowadays of
course we use metal or cermets for our core drills, but hollowed wood
or bamboo would probably also work, because what cuts is the abrasive.

Stocks did some experiments using Egyptian hollow reeds, very similar
to bamboo, as bow-driven tube drills, with some success, but he thinks
these were displaced by copper tube drills not long after 3600 BCE,
resulting in a “rapid increase in the manufacture of hard and soft
stone vessels” at that time, and mentions that in Minoan Crete (around
2000 years later) emery has been found adhering to drilled-out cores.
He was not able to drill granite with the reeds.  Emery is impure
corundum, or sapphire, which is the major abrasive used today in
industry and is dramatically more effective than quartz; Stocks
believes, however, that emery was not available in Egypt.

[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Core_drill

I suspect that if you needed to cut basalt or granite with a reed tube
drill, you might have more success after fire-hardening it, a
technology 400,000 years old, predating stone weapons, though not
stone tools.  Using an oil abrasive would have avoided softening the
reed with water, and probably would improve the efficiency of the
process.

Beaten copper tubes from the Fifth Dynasty have been found, and would
be much harder than either reeds or cast copper tubes.  They can also
be much thinner, also improving the efficiency of the process by
reducing the kerf width.  Despite this, Stocks believes that cast
copper predominated, in part because in his tests soft metal worked
better for abrasive cutting.

Ben claims that the evidence of the spiral groove on Petrie’s UC 16036
tapered red granite core is suppressed by mainstream archaeology
textbooks that tilt photos of it to make it appear non-spiral.
However, Stocks’s book — my reference for mainstream
archaeology — discusses this groove as an established fact, mentioning
Petrie’s resulting hypothesis that it demonstrated the use of tube
drills with jeweled teeth firmly fixed to the tube, rather than
abrasive cutting; Stocks rejects this as impractical.  He also points
out that Petrie found verdigris in tube-drill holes as well as saw
cuts, suggesting sawing with copper or bronze, and in one case even
bronze particles in a New Kingdom tube-drilled hole.

Another non-mainstream theory is that the Egyptians used sound
vibrations to drive their tube drills, rather than bow drills; modern
loudspeaker-driven experiments have demonstrated that this is a
practical approach.  Stocks points out that in his experiments, the
tapering observed in many ancient Egyptian tube-drilled holes and
cores was only observed with bow drills, which tend to rock the drill
back and forth in the hole.  Also, tomb paintings show woodworkers
with bow drills.

Flatness
--------

Ben makes much of the “flatness” of the various surfaces he observes.
However, it’s easy to see that many of the masonry walls he admires
are made of stones tightly fitted together upon installation, rather
than by using the flat surfaces that a circular saw would easily
produce.  Corners are curved, and hollows are cut into the corners of
stones (presumably by grinding away the points of contact), to enable
the blocks to fit together despite the extremely visible non-flatness
of their mating surfaces.

Some of the surfaces are indeed quite flat and well-polished, with in
many cases parallel scratches from the grinding and polishing process.

I have a vague memory that the technique of grinding three trial
surfaces against one another pairwise to achieve flatness, refined by
Henry Maudslay with hand scraping of metal, dates to ancient Sumeria,
however, I can’t find my source for this.  Clearly it wouldn’t require
any technology or materials unavailable at the time, though.
Sandstone or fired clay pottery with sand can easily achieve
100-micron flatness in this way, and fired clay tempered with silt
instead of sand can reach 10 microns.

In modern machining practice, once you have a flat surface, a standard
way to transfer this flatness to a new surface is by “lapping”:
putting a piece of sandpaper on your flat granite surface plate, then
moving the part to be lapped around on the sandpaper in order to grind
it flat.  This technique has been routinely used in optics for
centuries to achieve surfaces perfect to within a fraction of the
wavelength of light, though without interferometric inspection,
roughness of several microns is more commonly achieved.

A very similar process allows you to produce surfaces that are
perpendicular to very high precision, once you have a surface plate;
three trial squares are tested against one another on the surface
plate, being ground at their high spots.

In the [sequel video][7], Ben claims that Christopher Dunn‡ has used a
modern straightedge to measure some surfaces in some kind of stone box
in the Serapeum as being flat to within one thou, 25 microns, strongly
suggesting the use of the three-surfaces grinding method; the
perpendicular surfaces examined were also perpendicular to within
measurement precision (claimed to be much better, but he shows a photo
of the measurement being taken with a machinist’s square not capable
of such precision).  Ben does not mention why Dunn didn’t use a dial
indicator to examine flatness to micron precision, and indeed
describe’s Dunn’s method as “relative rudimentary testing”.

[7]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=2359&v=YZFN29FdCM0&feature=emb_logo

Although this video claims to be about “precision”, Ben doesn’t
provide a single metric of precision in the whole video; he never
says, “The interior of this vase is spherical to within 100 microns,”
or “The two sides of this statue’s face vary from one another by no
more than one millimeter.”  He only says things like “basically
perfect” and “identical”.

Ben makes much of the fact that incised hieroglyphs are not polished,
even when cut into flat polished stone surfaces, claiming that this
demonstrates that a much later and more primitive culture cut the
hieroglyphs than that which made the flat surfaces themselves.  To me
it seems more likely that hieroglyphs are unpolished to improve the
visual contrast with the surrounding stone.

‡ Christopher Dunn is author of _The Giza Power Plant_, a book
claiming that the Great Pyramid was actually a power plant harnessing
“harmonic resonance” to convert seismic energy to hydrogen and
microwave energy.  Ben promotes this book in the video.

Lathes
------

Bow lathes are well-attested from ancient Egyptian drawings.  Ben is
puzzled about how ancient Egyptian stone vessels were made (“I’d like
to see *anyone* try and make these by hand with copper chisels and the
known techniques of ancient Egypt,” he says in his second video), but
a glance shows that they were made on lathes — not continuous-rotation
lathes like modern lathes, but reciprocating lathes like bow lathes
and pole lathes, which allow you to, for example, leave handles on the
side of your jug, though those handles don’t enjoy the precise
circularity of the lathe-cut surfaces.  Bow lathes and pole lathes
were the common form of the lathe until the 18th century.

However, it must be admitted that the oldest surviving Egyptian
depictions of lathes date only from 1300 BCE, only 3300 years ago.  It
hardly seems surprising that the ancient Egyptians had lathes another
1000 years before that.  Ben does eventually mention lathes,
explaining that Petrie believed these pieces to be lathework.  As far
as I know, this is also the current mainstream academic archaeological
opinion as well; Ben claims that it is not, because the wheel was not
known at this date.  But a lathe does not require wheels any more than
a tube drill does.

Immediately after quoting Petrie talking about alabaster vases, Ben
starts talking about how amazing this is, particularly in “these very
hard materials”.  But alabaster is the second softest stone of all;
it’s gypsum, also known as plaster of Paris or sheetrock; you can
carve it with your fingernails.  (Some archaeological “alabaster” is
actually calcite, which is harder than gypsum, but only slightly.
Chalk is calcite.)

Perhaps Ben doesn’t know what alabaster is and didn’t think it was
worth looking it up, just like he seems to not know what “tenure” is.
But at some point the evidence starts to suggest that Ben is not just
misinformed or deluded but deliberately deceiving people.

Of course, lathework on such brittle materials would need to be
carried out by abrasion in the last stages, not cutting with gouges or
chisels.

Stocks in his book points out that the interiors of many of these jars
and vases were bored out using stone and wood boring tools, which are
clearly depicted in hieroglyphs.

The schist disc
---------------

Ben is also mightily impressed (in his second video) by a beautiful
schist disc in the Cairo museum with three graceful thin hyperboloids
symmetrically carved around a wheel; it’s usually known as the
Egyptian Tri-Lobed Disc.  He perhaps is not aware that you can make
such hyperboloids by cutting a series of straight lines between evenly
marked points along two curves.

Again Ben lies about the nature of a stone in order to persuade the
ignorant: he calls schist “this very hard stone”, but the defining
characteristic of schist is that it is very friable due to high
phyllosilicate content, which is in fact where its name comes from:
σχίζειν, to split.

Sometimes the artifact is described as “metasiltstone”, described as a
weakly metamorphosed form of siltstone or silty shale favored by
Egyptian sculptors for its suitability for thin carvings like this.

Weight
------

Ben makes much of the fact of moving stones that weigh tens of tonnes.
But if one person can lift 50kg, then, without levers, you only need
200 people to lift ten tonnes, which is a small number compared to the
population of Egypt at the time.  And if they can get 5:1 leverage
with some logs, then you only need 40 people.

Moreover, most of the process of moving a large stone like that
doesn’t involve actually lifting it; it’s much less effort to slide it
horizontally or on a seked-2 ramp, and you can do that with just ropes
rather than having to stick stuff underneath it.  And a fellow in
Canada has demonstrated his proposed stone-manipulation technique with
a several-tonne chunk of concrete: you balance it horizontally on a
small number of stone pivots near its center of mass, push down on one
end to lift it off all but one pivot, rotate it around that one pivot,
possibly position pivots anew, then release its weight so that it
settles on the pivots again.  Then you can start again from the other
end, allowing you to move the pivot you were using previously.  He was
able to move this slab entirely by himself, using the slab itself as
the lever.

Geometry of statues
-------------------

Ben, quoting Dunn, is very impressed with the geometric precision of
the heads of the Rameses statues at Luxor and the Ramesseum, claiming
that the only way to make such shapes nowadays is with CNC machining;
in 1970, he claims, it would have been impossible.  But he show Dunn’s
diagrams demonstrating that the heads’ shapes are mostly composed of
simple circular arcs and convex solids of revolution, carefully
planned to be tangent to one another.  (Dunn claims you’d need NURBS,
but his diagrams demonstrate the opposite.)

I do think it’s clear that the statues, like Tibetan sand paintings
and like pyramids since the time of Djoser, are laid out
geometrically, using precise procedures and measurements.  But I don’t
think this requires 18th-century technology, much less 21st-century
technology.  The Romain du Roi typeface was thus laid out in two
dimensions on a regular grid with circles and arcs in 1692.

The simplest brute-force approach would be to simply measure out a
large number of points in space.  Since we’re presumably talking about
enormous numbers of workmen sawing and grinding granite for decades,
the hard part is not the stone cutting; it’s knowing which stone to
cut and which to leave.  That is, the problem is measurement, or
sensing, not actuation.

A point in open space can be precisely located by its distance from
three reference points, which can be measured out precisely by metal
chains.  (Aside from the reflection ambiguity, of course, which would
not have presented the problem for sculptors that it does for GPS.)
Copper’s linear coefficient of expansion is 16–17 ppm/K; a
five-meter-long copper chain will thus lengthen and shorten by some
800 microns with a 10° temperature change, less than a millimeter.
The lengths of pieces of wood, clay, or plaster are even more
precisely constant, and even plant-fiber rope would probably be good
enough.  Distances measured with tiny copper chains on a small plaster
scale model of a sculpture can thus be scaled up to a full-scale
megalithic sculpture with submillimeter errors.

Ben, as usual, never quotes a tolerance, but he does include some
measurements from one of Dunn’s books, which are given to only four
significant figures, which would not be enough to detect
millimeter-scale errors.

Moreover, the Egyptians seem to have understood the Pythagorean
Theorem by the time of the Berlin Papyrus 6619 (12th or 13th Dynasty,
around 1800 BCE), several centuries before Ramesses, and it was in
widespread use in Mesopotamia at that time as well.  So you wouldn’t
have needed to make a scale model; you could have calculated.

Drawing tangent arcs and tangent lines on sand (or paper, or papyrus)
is easily done with compass and straightedge, both of which are ropes
stretched thin over sand until the Hellenistic period.  This may not
be appreciated by those who have never done it.

To make an arc tangent to another arc at point P, draw a line through
P and the center of the arc.  Any arc through P centered at any point
Q on this line will be tangent to the other arc there.  They form a
beautiful smooth curve.

Given a point P on a line L, select a point Q on L.  L and the circle
through Q centered at P have two intersections; one is Q; call the
other R.  The circle through Q centered at R and the circle through R
centered on Q have two intersections; the line through them is
perpendicular to L at P.

To make an arc tangent to a line L, and choose a point P on L.  Draw a
line M through P perpendicular to L.  For any point Q on M, an arc
centered at Q starting at P will be tangent to the line at P.

To make a line tangent to an arc at a point P on the arc, draw a line
M from the center of the arc through P.  The line perpendicular to M
through P is tangent to the arc at P.

Solids of revolution are most easily produced by a series of circles
around their axis, each circle produced by swinging two chains around
the axis from two reference points on it.  Given a smooth curve in one
plane containing the axis, you can use it to repeatedly set the
distances on the two chains to a point on the curve, then generate the
rest of the circle.  However, this will not work for convex surfaces
to be cut out of a solid material, because the chains would have to be
inside the material.

However, there are many other contrivances that can be put to the same
use, one of them being the lathe, which was already in use, as we have
seen.  But a wooden board that rotates around two pivot points, like a
door, would work just as well; the curve to generate the solid of
revolution can be cut into the board, allowing it to be accurately cut
into a plaster model.  To directly apply the method to the full-size
statues without a scale model, you probably need a different way to
swing your pattern points around your axis.

(To be continued?)

Backward progression
--------------------

One of the few things Ben says that I agree with, in his second video,
is that there seems to be a “backward progression of technological
capability” in ancient Egyptian technology, with Old-Kingdom artifacts
being often more finely made than Middle-Kingdom artifacts, which are
more finely made than New-Kingdom artifacts, which are more finely
made than Hellenistic-period artifacts.  The Egyptians themselves at
the time are known to have made similar comments, and of course the
Bronze Age Collapse loomed large in Classical Greek mythology and
popular culture.

I think the reason for this is relatively easy to understand:
technological progress is created by innovators like Imhotep, Djoser,
Champollion, and Feynman, not by conservative traditionalists.
Innovators must constantly struggle against conservatism to make any
progress.  But it’s easy to see, looking at the development of
hieroglyphic writing, ancient Egyptian art, and ancient Egyptian
metallurgy, that for millennia Egypt was a very traditionalist,
conservative society, even for its time; 1200 years after Imhotep,
they deified him and thus halted progress.  Even the adoption of iron
smelting in Egypt took from 2000 BCE until the [neo-Assyrian
conquest][8] in 671 BCE, several centuries after neighboring kingdoms.

[8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assyrian_conquest_of_Egypt
