For [Micro-casting fabrication](micro-casting-fabrication.md) I was
thinking it might be useful to be able to smelt copper into a mold
with a thermite reaction.  But for that you need cuprite, cuprous
oxide, which I do not know where to buy.

I think you’d probably have to synthesize it.

Copper has many salts, but more cupric salts than cuprous salts, and
its cupric salts are more often water-soluble.

Red **cuprous oxide** (cuprite) is insoluble in water, though not in
acids, and “degrades to [cupric oxide] in moist air”, while black
**cupric oxide** (tenorite) is also insoluble, though, again, not in
acids — or alkalis, with which it yields cuprate salts; and there is
additionally a hypothetical trivalent copper oxide which would be a
strong oxidizer.  White **cuprous sulfate** “decomposes rapidly in
presence of moisture” to copper and the highly soluble skin-staining **blue
vitriol**.  “Little evidence exists for” yellow **cuprous hydroxide**,
which is “extremely easily oxidized” to insoluble **cupric
hydroxide**.  **Cuprous nitrate** is almost unknown; blue-green
**cupric nitrate** is a common water-soluble bulk chemical, easily
synthesized from copper and silver nitrate.  **Cuprous iodide** is
precipitated from cupric ions and potassium iodide, releasing iodine;
there is no cupric iodide, or at any rate only a very unstable one.
Rare blue **cupric fluoride** is “highly soluble in water”; there is
no cuprous.  Dark green water-soluble **cupric acetate**, a component
of verdigris and used to make Paris green, can reportedly be heated
with copper to produce white **cuprous acetate**.  Basic **cupric
carbonate hydroxide**, another component of verdigris, is the
insoluble and hard malachite and azurite, depending on the amount of
hydroxylation; the neutral gray cupric carbonate readily hydroxylates
given half a chance, or decays to cupric oxide at low CO₂
concentrations; there is no cuprous.  Blue-green **cupric phosphate**
and phosphate hydroxide are the insoluble rare mineral libethenite,
or more commonly pseudomalachite,
depending on hydration and hydroxylation — or, with aluminum, turquoise;
again there is no cuprous.

So, excluding exotics, there seem to be no stable water-soluble
cuprous salts except (to an almost undetectable degree) the chloride,
iodide, and bromide.

(Incidentally, the above suggests that copper ions offer a way to
separate iodide and, if cupric, elemental iodine from a mixture of
chlorides and iodides, though I’m not sure it would work as well for
sodium iodide.)

WP suggests synthesizing cuprous oxide by the following routes:
directly oxidizing copper by heating it in air (but then how do you
separate the two oxides?); reducing cupric solutions to cuprous with
sulfur dioxide (maybe sodium thiosulfate
might also work; the ammonia in ammonium thiosulfate would probably form a
tetraammine-copper(II) complex, which which would be pretty but might interfere);
reacting cuprous chloride with bases to precipitate
the cuprous hydroxide; or reducing alkaline cupric solutions with
reducing sugars in Fehling’s or Benedict’s tests, where the copper is
complexed with potassium sodium tartrate or sodium citrate,
respectively, to prevent precipitation of cupric carbonate.
(Fehling's test is mentioned in Cooley's 1880 Cyclopædia, for example
under "Urine", along with Trommer's test, under "Sugar", which mixes
blue vitriol with sugar and "an excess of hydrate of potassium [KOH]",
then heats it to precipitate what sounds like cuprous oxide.  [The
advantage of Fehling's test][21] is reputedly that it was more
selective toward sugars and easier to prepare.  Benedict's test wasn't
introduced until 1907.)

[21]: https://theskepticalchemist.com/demonstration-benedicts-test-reducing-sugars/

Benedict's test sounds relatively easy, but it consumes reducing sugars,
such as glucose, fructose, or lactose — but not sucrose!  Though you
can hydrolyze sucrose with HCl — or, apparently, by boiling it with
citric acid.

I think you can also, crossing the streams, use a cupric solution to
oxidize copper metal, reducing the cupric ions to cuprous ions, and
simultaneously producing more cuprous ions from the metallic copper;
this is [reported to work with cupric chloride][0], for example.  The
etchant is maintained at an acidic pH with HCl so that the cupric
chloride remains soluble, and the temperature is ideally maintained at
50° to accelerate the etching process, though [Adam Seychell explains
that this is not necessary][1]; he prefers 30° to reduce the HCl
fumes.

[0]: http://jamme.acmsse.h2.pl/papers_amme03/1229.pdf
[1]: http://jimlaurwilliams.org/projects/seychellePaper/index.html

Electrolytically pure copper metal is readily available, if expensive,
and easily oxidized electrolytically to the chlorides, probably with a
little contamination from the iodide which is insignificant in this
context.  Somewhat less pure blue vitriol is available for US$5–$7/kg
as a fungicide and alguicide for swimming pools, though it, too, is of
course cupric rather than cuprous.  At about 250 g/mol (pentahydrate)
it’s about 25% copper (63.546 g/mol) by weight.

The thermite reaction with cupric oxide is hazardously rapid, so
cupric contamination is to be avoided here; washing the
nearly-insoluble white cuprous chloride thoroughly with water should
suffice to purify it, but after purification the resulting cupric
chloride must be kept dry to prevent disproportionation from
recontaminating the mix.  Similarly, cuprous oxide oxidizes to cupric
oxide in moist air, which is dangerous in this context.

Insoluble tribasic copper chloride (atacamite, another component of
verdigris) is manufactured in bulk as a nutritional supplement (though
not for humans — a substitute for blue vitriol for livestock) and a
fungicide.

[The electrochemistry chapter of Simon Quellen Field’s scitoys][2]
suggests making cuprous and cupric oxide by heating copper in air to
red heat for half an hour, then flaking the black cupric oxide off (by
allowing it to cool) to reveal the cupric oxide underneath.  I suspect
this is more practical as a way of making cupric-oxide semiconductor
thin films than as a way of obtaining bulk cupric oxide.  (The author
reported 50 μA at 0.25 V from their 0.01 m² cupric-oxide solar cell,
using salt water as the other electrode.)

[2]: https://web.archive.org/web/20150811222018/http://scitoys.com/scitoys/scitoys/echem/echem2.html

There’s also “red plague”: red cuprous oxide forming on the surface of
copper over months in humid environments due to galvanic corrosion
with silver plating.

Of all the options for producing cuprous oxide, I think the most
practical is probably to generate soluble cupric chloride by
electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride by copper electrodes, followed
by reduction to cuprous chloride with copper and HCl, then
precipitation as cuprous oxide with ammonia, yielding also ammonium
chloride — although perhaps a different base like sodium carbonate or
bicarbonate, or calcium hydroxide, is required to prevent the copper
from complexing with ammonia.  It would be super cool if acetic acid
were strong enough to allow the reduction and etching of copper to
proceed; Cooley’s 1880 Cyclopædia reports that dibasic acetate of
copper is “prepared on a large scale in France by exposing copper to
the air in contact with fermenting wine-lees”, so I suspect that
vinegar may be sufficiently strong to etch the copper.  Where I am
most uncertain is as to whether it is sufficiently strong to maintain
cuprous chloride in solution.  The Cyclopædia claims that heating
cupric chloride reduces it to cuprous chloride “at a high
temperature”, which Wikipedia suggests is 993°, well above its 498°
melting point, and a bit too high for this kitchen; WP claims cuprous
chloride is stable to 1490°, though melting at 423°.

Distillation of ammonia by absorption into pure water may be feasible
over days at room temperature; some random YouTuber reported
successful deposition of a great deal of verdigris by putting their
vinegar-and-salt-painted copper in a sealed box with a dish of ammonia
nearby.  [Another video experiment report by the impressive
mopatin](https://youtu.be/oC-A2qsbV_U) claims success at *reducing*
copper oxide, or perhaps the sulfides,
or perhaps dissolving them, with a mix of vinegar and
salt.  Others report success at making copper acetate from copper
metal, vinegar, and low-concentration H₂O₂, which last they claim is
not necessary.
