"Cyclic fabrication systems" is a term Matthew Moses, Hiroshi
Yamaguchi, and Gregory Chirikjian invented to describe a collection of
materials, tools, and processes capable of reproducing itself.  A CFS
is the keystone of economic autarky, of resilience against faraway
catastrophes, and of escaping resource scarcity traps, and its
exponential growth rate has historically been the major limit on
worldwide economic growth; consequently the study of CFSs is, or
should be, central to economics, although it is a relatively neglected
topic, involving as it does cross-disciplinary concerns from
engineering, materials science, chemistry, metrology, and economics.

A programmable, fully automated autotrophic CFS with a growth rate
exceeding that of the economy would eliminate the scarcity of capital
goods that has been the foundation of human economics for two million
years.

With that in mind, I thought it would be worthwhile to survey
historically and potentially existing CFSs.

Geometry
--------

The first category of CFSs to survey are those concerned with imposing
some existing geometry on some existing material.  For now we're not
so concerned with how the geometry or the material is created.

A feature common to many geometry CFSs is a sort of
rock-paper-scissors dynamic; in a given manufacturing process,
typically one material is stabler than another, so perhaps it can be
used to shape that other material.

For example, you can melt wax into a pewter mold, you can melt pewter
into a steel mold, and you can melt steel into a greensand mold; but
you can't melt greensand into any kind of mold, both because it
requires unreasonably high temperatures and because it ceases to be
greensand when you melt it.  Instead we rely on the fact that
greensand at room temperature is soft enough to be rammed around
patterns, made of materials such as wax, with tools made of materials
such as steel.

Pewter beats wax, steel beats pewter, greensand beats steel, and wax
beats greensand.  Thus we form the cycle that makes our fabrication
system cyclic.

### Flintknapping ###

Since the Paleolithic, the humans have shaped tools by banging rocks
together, a process called "knapping".  Arguably this is not a CFS,
because typically the hammerstones and other flintknapping tools such
as antlers and copper pressure-flaking tools are not themselves shaped
by flintknapping or flintknapped tools.

Knapping is somewhat limited in the geometries it can achieve, and it
can only shape materials that break in the right way, such as glass,
obsidian, and flint.

### Grinding ###

A major innovation in manufacturing technology some 35 millennia ago,
perhaps in Japan, was shaping stones by grinding them with abrasives,
rather than chipping.  It had spread to the Levant and Europe by some
10-18 millennia ago, where it is considered a distinguishing mark of
the Neolithic.  Grinding permits greater liberty of materials, surface
finishes, and geometry; abrasives can shape any solid material and can
achieve arbitrary geometry down to submicron scales.  In particular,
in the late Japanese Paleolithic and in the Mesolithic and Neolithic,
polished stone axes were much more durable than traditional knapped
axes; hole-drilling permitted much more adaptable and secure forms of
assembly; and Kebaran mortars and pestles began to automate the more
mechanical aspects of food digestion.

From a CFS perspective, there are several great features of grinding.
One is that the geometry of the workpiece can be more precise than the
geometry of the tool, because it is determined primarily by the
*movement* of the tool, as constrained by the workpiece and other
external systems, rather than the tool's geometry.  Another is that,
by grinding three surfaces against each other with abrasive between, a
precisely flat surface can be achieved without any flatness reference.
A third is that some hard materials are relatively easy to break, so
we can get a rock-paper-scissors cycle with only two materials: a
hard, brittle abrasive such as sapphire or quartz and a softer,
tougher hammering material such as copper or iron.  A fourth is that,
because of the aforementioned movement feature, it's actually possible
to get a CFS with just a single material such as sandstone or
concrete; you can dress a grinding wheel with an abrasive dressing
stick just by moving the stick back and forth across the wheel's face
while spinning it.  A fifth is that grinding generally does not
require heat or a minimum tool pressure, so it can be done while the
workpiece is not deformed, providing more precise geometry than other
ways of shaping materials.

Consequently various kinds of grinding, including lapping, play
central roles in all kinds of precision manufacturing even today.
Especially on glass materials, deep submicron precision is feasible.

### Pottery ###

Since the late Paleolithic or early Neolithic, the humans have made
pottery by sintering ("firing") composites of clays, sintering aids,
fillers, and sand into a sort of ceramic.  Sintering in general has the
advantage that the sintered material can remain solid at temperatures
exceeding those necessary to sinter it in the first place (for
pottery, in the 700°–1500° range depending on composition), so if the
temperature remains relatively predictable, a kiln for sintering such
pottery can itself be made of the same pottery.  Moreover, it is
possible (and, in historical practice, usual) to sinter the kiln
itself in place, rather than sintering firebricks in a separate kiln
and then assembling them into a kiln.

Clays go through a series of states of plasticity according to their
hydration.  Above about 25% water, they are colloidal liquids called
"slips"; around 22%, purely plastic solids or thixotropic liquids,
which shrink substantially as they dry further; around 20%, they
remain plastic over a large range of deformations but become capable
of brittle fracture ("leather-hard") and almost do not shrink upon
further drying; and below about 18%, they are fragile, brittle solids,
which do not shrink on further drying.  (The precise transition points
vary by clay composition, soaking time, and aqueous solute content.)
Firing results in further shrinkage.  The other components of the
so-called "clay body" can enhance plasticity and reduce sintering
temperatures, and they tend to decrease shrinkage.  The sintered clay
body is much stronger and can be nonporous, especially if sintered a
second time coated with a so-called "glaze" which melts fully rather
than just sintering; typically this results in further shrinkage.

Because fired or even dried clay can plastically deform leather-hard
or fully plastic clay, it is straightforward to use so-called clay
"seals" to reproduce geometry (in negative), and such "bullae" have
been a key security measure for commercial transactions for some 12
millennia, since the beginning of agriculture if not before; recently
metals are more commonly used instead of clay, but this innovation was
unknown until just a couple of millennia ago.  This process of molding
can be carried through multiple generations of clay seals, though not
without significant loss of fidelity, including, in particular,
shrinkage.

Such a clay-on-clay "sealing" process is probably responsible for the
oldest instance of movable-type printing, the Phaistos disk; and of
course movable type in Asia was made from pottery long before
Gutenberg.

In the leather-hard state, the clay body is still plastic enough to
take the impressions of seals, but also brittle enough to be cut with
blades.  Typically these are made of metal in current practice, but
blades made of fired clay also work.  Because most of the shrinkage
has already happened, forming clay in the leather-hard state results
in much more precise dimensions.

Clay is commonly "slipcast" in porous molds made of plaster of Paris:
a slip is poured into a mold, and the absorption of water into the
mold solidifies a layer of the slip in contact with the mold.  The
remaining slip is poured out, and the cast piece contracts as it dries
and can then be demolded.  Presumably it is possible to make the molds
of porous fired clay instead of plaster, though I have never heard of
it being done and have not attempted it myself.

Dried clay is also friable enough to be easily abraded or carved by
tools, including tools made of fired clay.

The precision of all of these shaping processes is limited by the
shrinkage and deformation of the ceramic during sintering, if
sintering is done; by the grain size of non-clay tempers, such as
sand, in the clay body; and by the shrinkage and deformation of the
clay body to its dry state, for shaping processes that rely on
plasticity.

Fired-clay ceramics play a key role in many more elaborate CFSs as
well, because (depending on composition) they can withstand relatively
high temperatures without losing their shape, they can easily be
shaped to complex geometries while plastic (especially if dimensional
precision is not critical), they are themselves relatively hard and
can embed even harder abrasives, and they are very inexpensive.

Like most ceramics, clay has extremely small elastic deformation in
all states, including the fired state, on the order of 0.01% strain at
failure.  This permits relatively high geometric precision, especially
when shaping dried clay, but it complicates the use of fired clay for
springs and other flexures.

Worth mentioning is the standard procedure for foaming pottery, which
is to mix a granular organic material such as sawdust or used yerba
mate into the clay body.  In an oxidizing kiln the organic material
burns out completely, leaving voids in the clay which reduce its
weight, impede crack propagation, and improve its thermal insulating
capabilities, and at higher void fractions permit easy fluid flow
through the fired piece.  Because of the crack-propagation
improvement, the foamed pottery can be cut to shape almost as if it
were wood.  I've tried void fractions from 50% yerba up to 85% yerba,
which last was quite fragile; above 66% yerba, the material permitted
easy airflow.  This porosity can be beneficial to the firing process
in allowing the fabrication of thicker shapes without steam
explosions.

So, the cycles here are: fired clay shapes plastic clay (by sealing,
slipcasting, or cutting), plastic clay dries into dried clay, and
dried clay is fired into fired clay; and fired clay carves dried clay,
and dried clay is fired into fired clay.

### Hot forging ###

Cold iron is harder than hot iron or even hot steel, so if you press
them together the cold iron will reshape the hot metal without itself
being reshaped.  This is common to a number of metal-shaping processes
including hot rolling, hot forging, and wire drawing; commonly
hammering is used to achieve sufficiently high pressures to deform the
hot metal.  (It is also the reason the World Trade Center collapsed,
despite the temperatures not being hot enough to melt its steel
beams; the heat softened them.)

However, the metal thus formed deforms during cooling, so these
processes generally cannot achieve tight dimensional tolerances.

So the cycle here is that cold iron forges hot iron, and hot iron
cools into cold iron.

### Hardened ferrous tools, cutting and hammering ferrous metal ###

Files and other hardened iron and steel tools can be used to cut
unhardened iron and steel, which can then be hardened.  Similarly,
hardened iron and steel hammers can be used to cold-forge unhardened
iron and steel.

There are several ways to harden ferrous metals, but nearly all of
them involve a great deal of heat, and so impose a certain amount of
uncontrolled deformation.  "Case hardening" by diffusing carbon (and
possibly nitrogen) into the surface of iron is a form of
solid-solution hardening known for two or three millennia;
"quenching", applicable to carbon steels, is another.  In quenching,
the metal is heated until it converts from ferrite to austenite, then
cooled too rapidly for it to reform ferrite at the surface, leaving it
in the metastable state of martensite, which is much harder than
ferrite.  (Sometimes the term "case hardening" is also used for
quenching only the surface of a piece of metal.)

Another is "work hardening" by hammering the surface ("cold working"
or "cold forging"), but typically the resulting hardening is
relatively small.  Cutting highly work-hardenable metals like copper
is difficult, because work hardening hardens the surface as soon as
you have cut it, and perhaps even before; consequently, the
carburization and quenching processes described above are the ones
used for cyclic fabrication systems.  Work hardening plays many
critical roles in metallurgy, but historically not in CFSs.

(Other forms of hardening, such as precipitation hardening, are not
applicable to iron and ordinary steels, though they are applicable to
some other alloys, like 17-4 stainless and beryllium copper.)

So the cycle here is that hardened steel cuts unhardened steel, and
then quenching or carburizing unhardened steel makes hardened steel.

### Sandcasting and lost-wax casting ###

As mentioned above, sandcasting is a common CFS, in the sense that
once you have a pattern for a castable shape, you can ram soft
greensand around the pattern in a flask to make a mold, disassemble
the flask, remove the pattern, reassemble the flask, and pour molten
metal into it to reproduce the shape of the pattern — first perhaps
arsenical bronze, but also copper, and more recently tin bronze, cast
iron, tin, pewter, pot metal, Zamak, pig iron, high-silicon aluminum
alloys, brass, and so on.

Greensand is sand (typically quartz; minerals that outgas at high
temperatures such as calcite or gypsum are forbidden) containing a
small amount of wet clay as a binder.  There is little enough clay so
that the mold is very porous, thus permitting easy passage of gas
through the sand, among other things to allow the mold to dry before
casting.  Typically the clay used is bentonite, since it can function
as a binder at the lowest levels, and those levels are low enough that
its expansivity is not a problem.

Aside from the raw materials, sandcasting requires minimally a
pattern, a riddle, a ram, a flask, a crucible, and a kiln (called a
"furnace").  The crucible and the furnace are necessarily formed of
refractory materials, and in usual practice must be exposed to air, so
pottery is the traditional material for them, making this CFS
dependent on the pottery CFS when used for ferrous metals; the
non-ferrous metals mentioned above can instead use ferrous crucibles,
and in theory could use ferrous furnaces as well, but pottery is much
more practical.  The pattern and flask are traditionally made of wood,
but metal would also work fine.  The ram can be made of wood or metal.
The riddle probably cannot be practically cast of metal, because it
needs to have many small holes, and casting is bad at those.  The
standard nowadays is to use a riddle of woven wires on a wooden frame,
but I think you could make one of fired clay (though my first attempt
to do so was not very successful) or woven flax sized with some kind
of abrasion-resistant coating.

In sandcasting, although the mold is destroyed when the casting is
shaken out of it, the pattern can be reused many times.  Nowadays the
patterns are often 3-D printed, but another bootstrapping option might
be to carve the pattern from foamed pottery.

I think older than sandcasting is lost-wax casting, which is similar,
but with a pattern of wax (traditionally a mix of beeswax and pine
resin, perhaps with some dry powdered clay as a filler) and a mold of
pottery.  Rather than removing the pattern from the mold before firing
the mold, the wax is simply left in the pattern, where it melts and
then burns out, just like the organic fillers used for foaming
pottery.  This does not permit the reuse of the pattern, but can
reproduce finer details than sandcasting, though with worse
dimensional precision.

A modern innovation in these processes is "lost foam casting", where
the pattern is burned out as with lost-wax casting, but the mold is
sand as with sand casting.  By making the pattern from an organic foam
such as styrofoam, it produces little enough gas that it need not be
removed from the mold ahead of time, but is instead burned out by the
hot metal; this eliminates the need for a binder and the need to
disassemble the flask, and styrofoam is easier to cut than the
traditional wood or, especially, metal.
