To connect two pieces of metal together, commonly you weld them.  This
is versatile and relatively inexpensive if you have a high-power
electrical supply, but it tends to stress and distort the metal, also
creating a heat-affected zone with a different crystal structure, and
it is challenging for some combinations of metals.

But many metals can be electrodeposited fairly easily, notably copper
and nickel.  What if you instead electrodeposited metal at the
junction of two existing metal pieces?  You could use an
insulated-shaft tool with electrolyte flowing through it, similar to
the kind used for EDM small hole drilling (and presumably also ECM
drilling), but electrolytically depositing metal and progressively
withdrawing from the hole rather than being fed into it.  This could
permit “welding” “without heat” (< 100°) and thus without distorting
the metal.  The material deposition rate would surely be much smaller
than with traditional welding, but if it can be deposited in precisely
the right place, you *need* much less material.

As with ECM, tool oscillation is a potentially valuable approach for
increasing flow of electrolyte through the process gap.

Deep eutectic systems and molten salts offer a similar approach for
metals that can’t be electrodeposited from an aqueous solution.  This
requires far lower temperature and is consequently far less hazardous
than welding, for example, magnesium by traditional methods.

Such “welding” might also be able to compensate for its low material
deposition rate by simultaneously depositing material evenly over a
very long seam, for example through electrolyte held in blotter paper.
Without inserting the electrode into the seam, good penetration would
be difficult or impossible to achieve, so you need to bevel the edges
so that you can electrodeposit at the bottom of a V-groove.

A place where this technique would really shine would be in replacing
“spray welding” for building up worn parts with new metal, at which
point it’s pretty much just ordinary electroforming.
