Earthships are cooled by the sun.  The greenhouse contains a skylight,
which when open produces suction from the buoyancy of the sun-heated
air.  This sucks air through the dwelling spaces from the cooling
tubes that run through the giant thermal mass behind the house.  When
this is not desired, the inhabitants close the skylight and the
cooling tubes and open the doors to the greenhouse to let the heat in.

Thus can a tiny air pressure difference produce an enormous heat flow:
the viscosity of air is low, so if an opening is wide, even an
imperceptibly tiny difference in pressure can produce a mass flow as
fast as the wind, which can carry with it an immense power of heat.

To be concrete, let us suppose that we have an opening of two meters
square with a subtle breeze of 2 m/s flowing through it.  Evidently
8 m³/s of air flows thus; at
[1.225 kg/m³](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Density_of_air) this is
about 9.8 kg/s, a staggering rate of 35 tonnes per hour.  At typical
air's isobaric mass heat capacity of
[1.012 J/g/K](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Table_of_specific_heat_capacities)
this works out to 9900 watts per kelvin.  That is, if the air
traveling through this aperture have a temperature a single degree
hotter or colder than the space it enters, it brings or displaces 9900
watts.  If the temperature difference be ten degrees, the power is 99
kilowatts, and if it be 40°, the power is nearly 400 kilowatts.

Air has some other remarkable advantages as a heat transfer medium,
aside from its low viscosity.  It's less toxic than any other fluid.
It's relatively non-corrosive up to 300° or so, and up to over 2000°
for oxides, phosphates, and fluorides.  It spans a wide range of
temperatures in gaseous form, from -182° (oxygen's boiling point) to
[some 1600° while preserving its nontoxic and noncorrosive
character](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOx#Thermal), and up to an
unlimited temperature if this is not important.  For the time being,
it's easily available, and the cost is low.

At temperatures between 0° and 100° we can direct the flow of air with
nearly any everyday solid material, including polyethylene bags, waxed
paper, styrofoam, plaster, wood, oiled muslin, PET bottles, cardboard,
clay, glass, and aluminum foil; outside this temperature range it can
become more demanding.  Within this temperature range the most
diaphanous of materials can contain it without injury, needing only
enough support from wires or the like to prevent its collapse.

