In addition to the fossil fuels that powered Song China and the
Industrial Revolution, Earth has stored an even larger amount of
energy as "fossil heat": heat that has been produced in the crust by
crustal radioactivity over its 4.6-billion-year lifespan (so far) that
has not yet had time to escape to the surface.  Additionally, an even
larger amount of heat energy is stored in the mantle and core from
Earth's initial formation, produced by the gravitational potential
energy of the matter that formed it.

This fossil geothermal energy, if extracted at an unsustainable rate,
could provide orders of magnitude more power than combustible fossil
fuels ever have; moreover, exploiting it would release no carbon
dioxide, only heat.

Economics and current outlook
-----------------------------

Currently photovoltaic power is so inexpensive (€0.17 per peak watt,
working out to about €0.85 per average watt at a typical 20% capacity
factor) that it is uneconomic to build heat engines to produce power,
whether to harness heat from fossil fuels, from nuclear energy, from
solar concentrators, or from such geothermal sources.  If new
manufacturing technology or new heat-engine designs can reduce the
cost of heat engines to below the cost of PV cells, it could enable
the exploitation of this fossil energy.  Otherwise, it is unlikely to
happen before most of Earth's insolation is being converted to
electricity.

There is probably no profit or economic incentive to go underground
other than as a temporary measure.  However, it would provide a
measure of security against potential global disasters such as comet
strikes, Carrington-class events, global totalitarian dictatorships,
global thermonuclear war, pandemics worse than covid, and the like;
whatever could survive independently underground would be relatively
safe from such events.

Ultimately available geothermal energy
--------------------------------------

Historically, geothermal energy has only been available in hotspots
with existing water reservoirs.  So-called "hot dry rock" or "enhanced
geothermal systems" geothermal involves hydrofracking of deep crustal
rock and pumping water through it; this can be done anywhere on Earth.

To give round numbers, the whole mantle is at 1000° or more, has a
specific heat of about 0.7 J/g/K, and weighs about 4 × 10²⁴ kg; this
amounts to a thermal energy of some 2.8 × 10³⁰ J relative to the
temperature at the surface, and so perhaps 1.1 × 10³⁰ J of energy
practically extractable at 40% Carnot efficiency.  (In fact, the
innermost part of the mantle is closer to 3700°, so this is a
conservative estimate.)  If extracted over 1000 years, this would
amount to 35 exawatts.  By contrast, total terrestrial insolation at
the usual standard "solar constant" of 1000 W/m² is only 0.13
exawatts, about 250 times smaller.

(The specific heat of the mantle is fairly uncertain.  The work I've
been able to find suggests that the specific heat of CaTiO₃ perovskite
is in the neighborhood of 0.5 to 1.0 J/g/K depending on temperature,
while CaSiO₃ [calcium metasilicate] and MgSiO₃ perovskites, which
compose much of the mantle, have a heat capacity in the range of
75–125 J/mol/K.  I figure calcium is 40, magnesium is 24, silicon is
28, and oxygen is 16, so those are 100–116 g/mol, which is in the
range of 0.7 to 1.25 J/g/K.  Regardless, most things have a specific
heat of around 1 J/g/K, water being a bit of an outlier at almost 4.2,
and heavy monatomic gases like xenon being a bit of an outlier in the
opposite direction at about 0.1.)

A heat engine requires a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir, but the
cold reservoir need not be the surface of Earth; a larger volume of
rock at a shallower depth would also suffice.

Enabling human survival underground
-----------------------------------

So a subterranean civilization, if it existed, could reach Kardashev
Level 1 without going above the surface.  But could it exist?

The humans' survival has a number of prerequisites other than energy.
They need cool, oxygen, nutritional compounds, gravity, water, quiet,
sleep, love, beauty, a sense of purpose, a relatively chemically inert
environment (lacking, for example, hydrogen sulfide or chlorine),
waste disposal, space, low pressure, and probably light.

XXX restructure this part

They can only directly harness energy provided chemically, the most
practical form of which is to grow plants, which need most of the same
things, also provide nutritional compounds, and definitely do need
light.

Cool can be provided in an underground chamber by insulating and
refrigerating it, pumping the heat into a cold reservoir elsewhere.
Oxygen can be extracted electrolytically from oxygen-containing rocks,
which is most of them.  Gravity is unavoidable on or in Earth.  Water
is abundant in the crust down to at least several kilometers; the Kola
Superdeep Borehole found that in that location hydrogen was abundant
even deeper than that, although perhaps that suggests that oxygen
wasn't.  Quiet is the default state underground, though soundproofing
might be needed in the vicinity of heavy machinery.  Sleep, love,
beauty, and a sense of purpose can be constructed by the humans
themselves.  A chemically inert environment might use nitrogen, which
is relatively scarce underground, or helium, which is abundant.

Space can be provided by producing oxygen from oxygen-containing
rocks, as described earlier, and pumping it closer to the surface.
The oxygen will either oxidize other rocks, if there are any nearby
that aren't already fully oxidized, or bubble to the surface
harmlessly.  The reduced rocks will occupy less space than the
original rocks.  Alternatively, if there is access to the surface,
spoil can be pushed to the surface, and especially at shallow depths
it may be possible to uplift an area of land to create space beneath
it — the reverse of the subsidence often associated with, for example,
brine-based salt mining.

(Neal Stephenson explored this theme fictionally in his novel
_Seveneves_, in which he posited that space underground could not be
expanded, so his hypothetical underground civilization had to make do
with the space that had already been excavated before the disaster the
novel is built around.)

Waste can be disposed of by recycling, which is mostly a matter of
separating wastes of unknown composition into their ingredients, or by
isolation, which is mostly a matter of keeping wastes of dangerous
composition away from the humans and their equipment, consuming space.
Aboveground there is no shortage of space; belowground, generally
whatever material is used must first be mined.  If the waste can be
melted into fully dense solids, it need occupy no more space than the
original rocks from which it was mined, but that might turn out to be
more difficult than just making more space to store looser waste in.

Low pressure is scarce underground, and the details depend on the
circumstances, but it can generally be provided by supporting the rock
above a cavern with materials of greater compressive strength than the
other rocks.  If they have 10% more compressive strength, they enable
you to fill 9% of the space with air; if twice the compressive
strength, half; if ten times the compressive strength, 90%; and so on.
Salt poses special problems, as it tends to flow horizontally back
into open spaces, but this takes decades or centuries; other rocks
will behave similarly at sufficiently high temperatures.

Light, air purification, food cultivation, air conditioning, cooling,
oxygen production, and rock electrolysis will all consume energy and
require specialized equipment.

Current tech limitations: ≈2× the size of the current economy for a century
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Much of the above calculation of geothermal energy abundance isn't
concerned with current technological limitations, but with the
ultimate limitations.  What's accessible within current limitations?

The amount of thermal energy in the crust is considerably smaller than
the amount in Earth as a whole; the temperature at the Moho
crust–mantle boundary ranges from 200° to 400°, and the crust is only
some 1% of Earth's mass, so we're talking about maybe 10²⁸ J in the
crust.  So far, despite 63 years of effort, the humans have not been
able to drill into the mantle; the Kola Superdeep Borehole ("Кольская
сверхглубокая скважин") only reached 12.3 km of drilling depth before
being doomed by the 180° temperature found there and the collapse of
the USSR.  (The crust is typically 30–50 km thick on continents, 5–10
km thick in the ocean.)  The KTB superdeep borehole persevered until
reaching 260° at only 9.1 km of depth.  These temperatures are
suboptimal for driving heat engines, since water's critical point is
374° and 22 MPa, but nevertheless clearly quite feasible.

Suppose we can routinely access the top 11 km of continental crust,
and that it's routinely 210°, in between the Kola numbers (14 km,
180°) and the KTB numbers (9 km, 260°), and that temperature increases
linearly from here to there, which is conservative.  Ocean covers 71%
of Earth, so the continents are about 148 million km², 1.48 × 10¹⁴ m².
Rock is about 2.4 g/cc so these top 11 km are about 3.9 × 10¹⁸ tonnes
of rock.  If it were all 210° and 0.7 J/g/K, the thermal energy to
drop it to 20° would be 5.2 × 10²⁶ J, so a linear increase gives you
half that, 2.6 × 10²⁶ J.  Rather than actually calculating the Carnot
efficiency, I'll just assume it's about 25%, giving 6.5 × 10²⁵ J
electric.  If that were to be extracted over the next century, it
would yield almost 21 petawatts, electric, or 620 000 "quadrillion BTU
per year" (electric) or 180 million terawatt hours (electric) per
year, in the medieval units used by the IEA.

XXX <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_energy_consumption> say 18
terawatts.  FEEX

This is about twice current world marketed energy consumption, but
that doesn't include sunlight on fields, which a purely subterranean
civilization would need to include.

This should be sufficient to develop technology for deeper drilling
and/or Dyson-sphere construction.

It's plausible that the amount of available energy with current
technology is a few times larger than this, because the above does not
take hotspots and tectonically active zones into account, nor the
ocean floor.

Earthquakes
-----------

Enhanced geothermal systems projects in Pohang and Basel have been
canceled after causing earthquakes locally; in Pohang no humans died
but more than a hundred were injured, though in both places the
earthquakes were fairly minor.  We can expect that widespread use of
EGS would produce widespread minor earthquakes, even as it depletes
the source of energy that drives volcanism and seismic activity.

Even if it does not pose a risk to surface civilization, for example
because of being located far from surface cities, this induced
seismicity would be clearly detectable from the surface, while the
tunnels and increased oxygen emissions probably would not.  In places
with little natural seismic activity, it would be more conspicuous
than in places with a great deal.
