Yield strengths and ultimate tensile strengths cover a similar-sized,
but lower and narrower, range than Young's moduli.  They generally
correlate, although there is substantial deviation — the plastics have
immense deformations at break, the metals smaller, the ceramics
smaller still.

Here's a table of very approximate quantitative figures:

    |                              | Young's | yield   |      tensile |
    |                              | modulus | stress  |      rupture |
    |                              |   (GPa) | (MPa)   |        (MPa) |
    | diamond                      |    1000 | brittle |        60000 |
    | tungsten carbide             |     600 | brittle |          300 |
    | sapphire                     |     400 | brittle |          400 |
    | carborundum                  |     400 | brittle | 120-3000 (?) |
    | cubic zirconia               |     200 | ?       |          700 |
    | A36 steel                    |     200 | 250     |          500 |
    | zircon                       |     200 | brittle |          300 |
    | tooth enamel                 |      80 | brittle |           20 |
    | soda-lime glass              |      70 | brittle |          100 |
    | 6061 aluminum                |      70 | 76-370  |      130-410 |
    | quartz                       |      80 | brittle |           40 |
    | concrete                     |   25-50 | brittle |            4 |
    | lead                         |      14 | creeps  |           15 |
    | wood (along grain)           |    9-14 | brittle |            5 |
    | poly(methyl methacrylate)    |       3 | brittle |           70 |
    | poly(ethylene terephthalate) |       3 | ?       |           70 |
    | gypsum plaster               |     1.4 | brittle |            3 |
    | high-density polyethylene    |     0.8 | ?       |           20 |
    | styrofoam                    |   0.005 | brittle |          0.4 |

Critters (the technical term) use teeth, claws, and beaks to cut
things, maneuvering them into position with softer tissues.  A
smallish tooth can have an even smaller point that digs into the
material to cut, supported by a wider base rooted in a "handle" of
material softer than the tooth itself, which is held in still softer
material.

Machines can use the same technique, and sometimes do: lathes, fly
cutters, boring bars, shapers, and D-bits all cut with a single point,
often made of a cermet; it's common to dress grinding wheels with a
single-pointed diamond mounted at the end of a steel dressing tool; a
woodworking plane commonly uses a steel blade held in a wooden frame;
and a hand file commonly consists of case-hardened steel teeth on the
surface of a piece of softer steel, held in a softer wooden handle,
held in a still softer hand.

For example, you could imagine a tungsten-carbide tooth (sometimes
these are called "teeth", other times "tools", "bits", or "inserts")
shaving a 100-micron-thick, one-millimeter-wide shaving ("chip") as it
scrapes along a steel surface.  WC (the most unfortunate chemical
formula ever) is several times stronger in compression, some 1500 MPa,
but suppose we limit ourselves to its 300 MPa tensile strength; then
the tungsten carbide will keep cutting as long as the force is less
than 30 N.  This is enough to get the steel to yield so that the
carbide can propagate a crack under the chip.  (Carbide's higher
compressive strength clearly helps a lot here.)

The carbide can be held in a softer material such as steel or even
aluminum; to keep those 30 N under the 76 MPa worst-case yield stress
of the aluminum, we need at least 0.4 mm² of contact area between the
carbide and the aluminum.  So the carbide tooth itself could be tiny,
with a 100-micron-long, 1-millimeter-wide point, supported on an
800-micron-tall pyramid with an 800-micron-diameter circular base.  In
fact, at such a low stress, even PMMA and PET would be strong enough
not to rupture, although they would certainly creep; a more
conservative approach would be to use a truncated aluminum cone with,
say, an 800-micron circular tip, 3 mm height, and a 3-mm-diameter
circular base, supported on wood, HDPE, PMMA, PET, or many other
possible materials.

It probably isn't practical to cut most steels with something much
smaller than that tooth, because the steel is too ductile; you'll end
up just forming the steel instead of cutting it.  The surprising thing
is that 0.2 mm³ of tungsten carbide, about π milligrams, is sufficient
to enable cutting steel.  200 surface feet per minute (in the medieval
units commonly used in machining in the USA) is probably achievable,
which works out to 1.02 m/s in SI units, so this is a material removal
rate of some 102 mm³/s of steel, about 0.8 g/s, removing the mass of
the carbide tooth itself roughly every 4 milliseconds.

Assuming a 15 minute tool life, this means that this tooth can remove
about a quarter of a million times its own mass in steel during its
lifetime.

A single gram of tungsten carbide contains enough material to make
some 300 such teeth.

It is possible to substitute an intermediate-hardness material for the
base of the tooth.  Steel, a harder aluminum, or yttrium-stabilized
zirconia would work.  (You could try zircon, but I suspect it would be
too fragile.)

Alternative metal-cutting tooth materials
-----------------------------------------

Traditionally, steel was cut merely with case-hardened steel, but this
has its limitations.  19th-century advances in steel improved tool
life considerably, but today steel is usually cut with ceramics,
especially the tungsten carbide mentioned above.

Three other hard ceramics mentioned above — sapphire, carborundum, and
zirconia — may be more easily produced from terrestrial materials than
tungsten carbide.  Tungsten atoms are outnumbered by silicon in
Earth's crust about a million to one.  Sapphire is made from aluminum
and oxygen; aluminum is very nearly as common as silicon, while oxygen
is even more common.  Carborundum is made from silicon and carbon;
carbon is outnumbered by silicon only about 300 to 1, and of course
diamond is entirely carbon.  Zirconium is outnumbered by silicon about
3000 to 1, making it about 300 times as abundant as tungsten.
Zirconia is quite brittle if not stabilized with, for example, 2–3% of
yttria, but fortunately yttrium is only about one order of magnitude
rarer than zirconium itself.

Zirconium has the additional merit of being relatively easy to
concentrate, since it forms separate grains of zircon (jacinth,
ZrSiO₄) in many igneous rocks, including most granites, which are
easily separated from sand by their high density (4.6 g/cc); they are
also separable by their refusal to melt at any reasonable temperature
(below 2500°, though they sinter at much lower temperatures).  Zircon
itself, perhaps even naturally-occurring crystals, may be usable as a
material for cutting metal; but zirconium is readily, if expensively,
derived from it by calcining with carbon and chlorine, then reducing
the resulting zirconium tetrachloride with magnesium, the same Kroll
process used to reduce titanium; and zirconia is superior to zircon in
almost every way.

Historically carborundum was discovered by Acheson running an electric
arc through a mixture of clay and coke in an iron crucible, insulated
by the granular materials themselves, in 1890; but Despretz probably
made it without knowing in 1849 by joule-heating of a carbon rod
embedded in silica sand, which is essentially the "Acheson process"
used today; sawdust and salt are former additives now little used.
(This is also the first process for making synthetic graphite, by
heating the carborundum until the silicon sublimes at 4150°.  XXX
wouldn't graphite sublime too?  Shouldn't that be 2830°?)

Sapphire is normally refined as an intermediate step in the production
of aluminum, for example by the Bayer process: low-silica bauxite is
digested in 170°–180° lye (or anhydrous 1200° sodium carbonate and
coke, in the Deville process) to obtain sodium aluminate, from which
crystalline aluminum hydroxide is precipitated (by cooling, by
neutralization with CO₂, or simply by evaporation with seed crystals).

Zirconium carbide can be made simply by carbothermic reduction of
zirconia with graphite; it is even harder than zirconia itself (?),
though it has "poor oxidation resistance over 800°".
