Mycalex is a composite of mica and glass, one of Dan Gelbart's
favorite ceramics for its cheapness and ease of machining, though it's
much less popular now than it was in the 1940s.  (Machinable
glass-ceramics that precipitate mica crystals during heat treatment
were invented in the 1970s and may be responsible for some of this).
But mica is used as a filler in many composite materials.

I dissected a broken microwave last weekend and found that the window
protecting the magnetron from spattering food seems to be a mica
composite; it's slightly translucent to light, but when heated with a
butane torch to orange heat, it remained intact and barely burned.  It
did turn black and outgas a little, enough to blister the surface a
bit.  [Wikipedia says phlogopite can withstand 900°][0], though some
other micas only survive to 500°, so this seems likely to be
phlogopite-based "mica paper", as the USGS calls it.  It isn't pure
phlogopite, because that wouldn't turn black.  Many vendors offer
sheets of "mica" on MercadoLibre for microwave repairs, suggesting to
cut them to the correct size with scissors or a razor knife.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mica#Properties_and_uses

I think such sheets (or sheets of pure mica) were the traditional form
on which wire resistors were zigzagged, from which we get the
schematic symbol.

WP also points out that it's used in drywall mud, presumably for
mechanical strength, and as a filler in paint and plastics, where it
has many benefits, including increasing strength and dimensional
stability.  Dry-ground mica is dull, wet-ground mica is sparkly.

It occurs to me that including ground mica in "Starlite" might help it
retain strength when it's being charred.  (And maybe foam up better,
too.)  Similarly, it seems that it might help keep alabaster from
crumbling when dehydrated; see [the note on plaster
foam](plaster-foam.md).  The alabaster would still remain solid to a
higher temperature than the mica, but it becomes very friable when
dehydrated (at under 200°); retaining substantial strength to 900°
could be very valuable.

Ceramics-supply vendors on MercadoLibre sell finely ground mica for
about US$2 per kg, but of course they don't tell you which mica it is.
Calcining microwave-oven window panels would be a sure way to get
refractory mica, but it's rather expensive by comparison.  [The USGS
says scrap and flake mica costs US$120–165/tonne at wholesale][1];
this is an interestingly low price because it means that alabaster
mixed with mica is still cheaper than muriate of lime; see [the note
on desiccant climate control](desiccant-climate-control.md).  If the
admixture of mica were under about 40%, the mixture would cost the
same order of magnitude as the alabaster alone.

[1]: library/mcs2020-mica.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-mica.pdf"
