Placer mining sorts grains of sand roughly by density, so it can
separate out gold from the other minerals, which are mostly less dense
by a factor of five or more.  With somewhat more difficulty it can
separate out other dense minerals like monazite, zircon, and even
magnetite.  A miner with a gold pan and some water might be able to
pan the gold out of 200 mâ„“ of sand in some 30 seconds; if the mean
sand grain is some 30 microns in diameter, this amounts to picking the
dozen or two grains of gold out of several billion grains of sand, a
rate of several hundred millions of grains per second.  Impressive,
for a human.

Various kinds of froth flotation, flocculation, and deflocculation of
crushed rock work in a similar way to separate out massive numbers of
grains by various physical properties.

Suppose that we instead use machine vision, X-ray diffraction,
frequency-dependent complex electric permeability, and so forth to
sort through individual grains.  For example, nearly all granite has
grains of zircon in it, precious for its use in the manufacture of the
resilient refractory ceramic zirconia.  If we break up the granite,
perhaps we can use automated feedback systems to sort through at least
a few thousand crystals per second per machine, needing only a few
hundred thousand machines to compete with the 49er with his gold pan.

Of course, in 02020, the idea of constructing a few hundred thousand
machines sounds absurd, but in fact I am typing this on a computer
containing several tens of billions of transistors and capacitors, one
which is already obsolete.  So in fact such things are not impossible;
MEMS simply has not focused on them thus far.
