A lot of laboratory apparatus for processing exotic materials hasn’t
changed much since the time of Bunsen — though electric heating
mantles are new, and now stir bars are covered in teflon instead of
glass, many other things are still the same.  What might it look like
if we designed it from scratch today?

Perhaps we would focus more on continuous-flow processing rather than
batch processing, handling very small quantities of liquid or other
material at a time.  Maybe we’d use teflon gaskets more.  Our lego
blocks might be smaller than traditional flasks; we might have
micro-channel blocks that swing open at a parting line to expose the
interiors of the channels for cleaning, pressed together by a clip.
Captive gaskets between them would separate the cavities along the
parting line; at ordinary temperatures these would be made of teflon,
but higher-temperature blocks would use gaskets that are brittle at
room temperature, softening as their Tg is exceeded.

Some blocks could incorporate their own electrical heating elements,
catalyst foams, valves, and so on.  For thermal insulation, they could
incorporate vacuum “panels” containing multilayer insulation, for
example of gold leaf or aluminum foil.

Microfluidic devices are capable of executing many experiments at
once, and are widely used for this in biology today.

There is in most cases no need for the surface of vessels to have a
significant affinity for liquids; superhydrophobic or omniphobic
surface treatments would significantly reduce corrosion,
cross-contamination, and cleaning effort.  Fluorinated surfaces are
another, cheaper alternative.  Moreover, in many cases, such a surface
would prevent the entry of water or other liquids into small channels
without pressure being applied.

The use of such blocks could make high-pressure processing routine,
since they can easily be made to contain high-pressure materials.

Glass is fragile; in many cases it could be replaced by fluorinated
plastics or fluorinated ceramics.  Modern fabrication techniques are
capable of mechanically carving channels through many materials, and
often of molding them as well.

One possible candidate replacement for glass is fluorite, which [cost
US$300 per tonne in
02020](https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-fluorspar.pdf),
can be optically clear even into infrared and ultraviolet, and has
good resistance to some corrosive agents.  It doesn’t melt until
1418°.  Although it is noticeably more fragile than the traditional
borosilicate, its major flaw, which is fatal for many uses, is that it
cannot deal with strong acids.

Crystalline alumina is better than borosilicate in every way except
that it is very difficult to shape.  There is no known alumina glass,
and polycrystalline sintered alumina ceramics are in wide use, but
they are [never
transparent](https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/661487.pdf
"Development and evaluation of transparent aluminum oxide").  General
Electric’s 01961 “Lucalox” sodium-vapor lightbulbs (“transLUCent
ALuminum OXide”) were *translucent* sintered alumina; the 1959 [Nature
report on them](https://www.nature.com/articles/1841107d0) said they
were “presumably sintered *in vacuo*”, and that objects viewed from a
distance were “blurred as though through frosted glass”.  [A 01996
article by J.E.  Burke, one of its
inventors](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/mrs-bulletin/article/lucalox-alumina-the-ceramic-that-revolutionized-outdoor-lighting/58969D625820E257532B8D4BCF068FDC)
explained that it was doped with a fraction of a percent of MgO before
sintering at 1800°, preventing pore retention by preventing
discontinuous grain growth that traps pores within grains, and that
pore-free alumina is translucent because alumina is birefringent.  He
also notes that to bring out grain boundaries by etching, he resorted
to etching the alumina with molten exotic K₂S₂O₇, and that sintered
pore-free alumina is “the only successful material found to date
[01996] for containing the plasma of the high-pressure sodium-vapor
lamp”.

Yttria-stabilized zirconia is already seeing some use in labware, but
usually in a non-transparent form — though transparent YSZ is widely
used for jewelry.  It is outstandingly resistant to corrosion, fairly
hard (though less so than alumina), and above all, tough.

Other [transparent
ceramics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transparent_ceramics) include
yttria doped with 10% thoria to prevent discontinuous grain growth,
analogously to Lucalox (the former Yttralox, which contains no
alumina, despite its name) and lanthana-doped yttria, melting at
2430°.  Unfortunately yttria is vulnerable to concentrated
hydrochloric acid with ammonium chloride, thoria is radioactive, and
lanthana is soluble in dilute acids.  Also, Rosenflanz’s
alumina-containing rare-earth glass-ceramics from 2004; yttria–alumina
garnet (YAG); aluminum oxynitride spinel; magnesium aluminate spinel,
aka just “spinel”; topaz; silicon carbide; chrysoberyl; beryl, such as
emerald; berlinite; chalcogenide and phosphate glasses; transparent
glass-ceramics like Corning VISION; zircon (zirconium silicate);
rutile; boron nitride; and so on.

Fluorinated polymers may be a reasonable inert alternative to ceramic
materials for many low-temperature purposes, as well.  Tubes of
materials like PVDF (Kynar) can carry most materials with impunity,
though [only up to
150°](https://www.fluorotherm.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/PVDF_Max_Temp_Usage.pdf)
in that particular case, and also not very aggressive materials.
Teflon can withstand both higher temperatures and more corrosive
materials, and many plastics and even metals can have their surfaces
fluorinated in order to make them more inert to their contents, as
well as in most cases decreasing wettability, as mentioned earlier.
