I was looking at [a thread on the orange
website](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23200830) and I was
surprised by people’s shortsightedness.  They’re talking about how the
stock market remains high despite the pandemic’s damage to the
economy, but their spectrum of possible outcomes seems to stop at the
Great Depression.

I see a lot of people in the US trying to understand the current
disaster through the lens of the last big disasters that happened in
the US: the US involvement in the Vietnam War, the US involvement in
WWII, the Great Depression, the 1918 flu.  Of course I don’t know what
is going to happen — and if I did, I wouldn’t want to attract the
resulting attention — but I think you should take a wider perspective.
This might be an OCP, more like when Sherman marched to the sea or
Cortés rode into Tenochtitlán.  It might be more like Cambodia’s
experience of the Vietnam War than the US’s.  Things may change more
than you expect.  The US may not survive.

As [Annalee Newitz writes in the New York Times of the Bronze Age
Collapse](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/11/opinion/sunday/coronavirus-inequality-history.html):

> When their cities were swallowed by fire, the Bronze Age ruling
> classes lost everything, including the subjects they once
> controlled.  Greece’s population dropped by roughly 50 percent
> during this time, probably because of a combination of war, drought
> and migration, according to Sarah Murray, a classics professor at
> the University of Toronto and author of “The Collapse of the
> Mycenaean Economy.”  Mr. Cline believes that plagues may have driven
> people into the hinterlands, too.

It’s hard to estimate the probability of such a country-destroying
disaster, so it’s tempting to just dismiss the possibility out of hand
as outlandish — nothing like that could possibly happen, since the US
has remained stable and indeed grown in power in our lifetimes, in our
parents’ lifetimes, in our grandparents’ lifetimes, even in our
great-grandparents’ lifetimes.  It’s tempting to assume that an
edifice that has thus stood the test of time will endure forever.
Moreover, since the United Nations won World War II, the world has
experienced a historically unusual period of relative peace, the [Pax
Americana](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pax_Americana), sometimes
called the [American
Century](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Century).

Country collapse base rate estimation: on the order of 1% per year
------------------------------------------------------------------

But periods of peace and countries do not endure forever; they are
wracked by invasions, revolutions, military coups, and simple
collapse.  What’s the base rate of such events?

Let’s consider specifically the kind of events that upend the
established order in a country and consign the rich and powerful to
poverty and death.  Again, it’s hard to measure precisely, but we can
get within an order of magnitude.  In recent centuries, most countries
experience such a major upheaval about once every century or two.
Once a decade is clearly too often, and once a millennium is too rare.

### A cross-section across countries in the last few years ###

Let’s consider recent events worldwide.

At the beginning of 2020, most countries still had the same way of
life they had in 2010 and indeed in 2000, and investments made in 2000
were still secure in 2020.  We can enumerate the exceptions: Egypt,
Tunis, Iraq, Congo, Liberia, Syria, Afghanistan, Sudan (if you live in
Darfur), the Rohingya regions of Myanmar and India, parts of the Niger
delta, Yemen, the Crimea, Venezuela, Libya, and arguably Hungary,
Mexico, Bolivia, Ukraine, Mali, Honduras, Kyrgyzstan, Ecuador, and
Turkey.  That’s somewhere around 10 to 30 countries, although at the
border, it’s pretty fuzzy.

That’s out of about 200 countries (again, pretty fuzzy), so we’re
looking at a rate of around 0.5% to 1% per year.

But is that really fair?  Afghanistan has been a mess for generations,
and the Crimea for centuries.  Perhaps some polities, like Switzerland
and the Roman Republic and Empire, are very stable, while others, like
Afghanistan, are very unstable.  (Note, though, that Rome suffered its
share of disastrous revolutions and sackings before it finally fell.)

That’s as may be, but for now we’re just trying to establish the base
rate.  Later we can work out how large and frequent to expect local
deviations to be, and in which direction.

### A longitudinal survey of the recent histories of some random countries ###

Let’s take a longitudinal survey looking at the histories of
particular countries.  If you look back in the history of any given
country, you mostly only have to look back a few decades to the last
such event, maybe a century or two.  Let’s look at every 17th country
from [Wikipedia’s list of countries by water
use](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_freshwater_withdrawal).

* [India](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India)?  Partition, in 1945.

* [Italy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italy)?† Following the
  Holocaust (killing some 15% of its Jewish population), in 1943 they
  were defeated in World War II, their prime minister hung upside down
  from a gas station, their king forced to abdicate, and much of their
  territory given to Yugoslavia and the United Nations; over the next
  40 years they had successive economic crises and terrorist
  massacres.

* [Syria](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syria)?  Currently on fire.

* [Kyrgyzstan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyrgyzstan)?  The Soviet
  Union collapsed there in 1991, ushering in decades of poverty (22%
  of the population is still below the poverty line), the capital was
  looted during a popular uprising in 2005, the mafia keeps
  assassinating parliamentarians, the president fled in 2010, and the
  interim president requested an invasion from Russia to put down an
  incipient civil war.

* [Cambodia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambodia)?  The [Khmer
  Rouge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khmer_Rouge) killed all the
  intellectuals and a quarter of the population in 1975–8.

* The [United Arab
  Emirates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Arab_Emirates)? The
  current state there was established when the British blew up Ras
  al-Khaimah in 1819, conquering the country.

* [Oman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oman)?  In the 18th century it
  was the preeminent power in the Indian ocean.  After centuries of
  decline, Britain bombed the shit out of it from 1957 to 1959 in
  order to bring the Imamate of Oman (incidentally, one of those
  thousand-plus-year-long states like Rome) under the power of its
  ally the Sultanate of Oman.

* [Suriname](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Suriname)?‡ It had a civil
  war in 1986–9 in the wake of the bloody 1980 coup (whose winner is
  the current president, though recently sentenced to 20 years in
  prison), and although the genocide of the Americans during the
  colonial era was far less complete there than elsewhere in America,
  only 4% of Suriname’s people today speak an American language and
  less than 2% practice an American religion.

* [Qatar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Qatar)?  Doha and al-Wakra
  were sacked and looted by forces from Bahrain and Abu Dhabi in 1867,
  following which point Qatari sovereignty was established.

* [Papua New Guinea](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Papua_New_Guinea)?
  They were a major battleground of World War II in 1942–5.

So in sorted order the last time there was a country-destroying
catastrophe in these countries were 1819, 1867, 1943, 1945, 1945,
1959, 1978, 1989, 2010, and 2020, with a mean date of 1947.  We can
see some clustering there: two of the countries were destroyed in
World War II, and India’s destruction (and subsequent glorious
rebirth) as part of the collapse of the British Empire was surely
related to World War II as well.  Whatever the distribution and
clustering of these catastrophes within any given country, we should
expect that the distribution of intervals since the most recent
catastrophe is the same as the distribution of intervals until the
next one.

In particular, this controls for the problem of instability
clumpiness: like unstable servers, unstable countries tend to remain
unstable for decades, with one crisis or collapse rapidly following
another, so if we just count the collapse events in the world over
some period of time, we will get an unrealistically high number.
Today, for example, Oman has been stable since 1959, but its previous
century was riven with intrigues, secessions, civil wars, truces,
invasions, and gradual subjugation by colonialist British boots.

This suggests an average time-since-violent-collapse (and thus also
time-until-violent-collapse) of some 73 years, with a fairly smooth
distribution containing a significant number of countries going out to
200 years of stability or so.

What about the USA?  Does it not have 240 years of stability?  Only
from the point of view of the Northerners; the catastrophic
depredations of the Civil War in 1861–5 reduced the Southern states,
which previously included the richest part of the country, to a
poverty from which they have not recovered 155 years later, although
of course the poorest people in the South were thus immeasurably
enriched.  (Please note, I am not arguing that the Civil War should
not have happened; I am merely saying that if you were a wealthy
investor in the Confederacy, you would likely be ruined by the war.)
It was no picnic for the North, who suffered some 800'000 casualties,
some 10% of its fighting-age men.

Even so, 155 years of stability puts the US in the tail of our
empirical distribution, bested only by the UAE in my sample above.
Still, it should give us some pause that the US spent four of its 240
years at war with itself.  Stability is not to be taken for granted.

† Oops, now I realize Italy is one country early.  I guess I’ll go
with it.

‡ Oops, now I realize Suriname is one country early.

### What direction should we correct these order-of-magnitude estimates? ###

These figures give especial weight to the 20th and early 21st
centuries.  To some extent, this is justifiable: there are secular
trends that change what is possible and what is probable, so events in
the 16th century perhaps have less bearing on what could happen in the
21st century than events in the 20th do.  On the other hand, we should
be alert to the possibility that a short recent period, like 2000 to
present, 1980 to present, or 1940 to present, is really representative
of what is to come — it might happen to be anomalously stable or
anomalously unstable, in a way that might not continue to hold true in
the next decades.

Do we have strong reasons for believing this to be the case?

I don’t think we do.  On one hand the Pax Americana reduced the number
of large wars, but the Cold War also destabilized countries — this was
a factor in the Suriname coup mentioned above and the destruction of
the Imamate of Oman, for example, and Cambodia was of course only able
to get away with its abuses because so many saw them as needed
measures that only affected those with privilege, anyway.
Kyrgyzstan’s collapse was a result of the Cold War’s end, although
it’s done worse than many former Soviet republics — would it have been
stabler and safer without the Pax Americana and consequent Cold War?
Perhaps.  Or perhaps it would have been more unstable and more
dangerous.

How about USAmerican exceptionalism?  Do we have strong reasons for
thinking that the US is far more stable than other countries?  I don’t
know that we have strong evidence either way.  The US is still the
world hegemon, and hegemons tend not to be invaded by the countries
they dominate.  But their economy frequently depends on their
hegemonic status, which is fairly fragile, and its loss can
precipitate major upheaval — even when internal power struggles don’t.

So I don’t think there’s a strong justification for thinking that the
US’s risk of collapse in average years is significantly different from
the 1% or so from the above.

But this is not an average year; we have covid — thus a 20% chance of collapse
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is an unusual time.  An economist at the Federal Reserve has
projected 34% unemployment in the second quarter of 2020, which is
higher than the peak of the Great Depression — and that’s six months
into the covid pandemic, not three years in.  Unemployment insurance
claims are orders of magnitude above past records.  Last month New
York City started digging mass graves for the overload of coffins as
its covid infection rate peaked.  Also, the US elected a reality TV
host as President, and he fired its pandemic preparedness team before
the pandemic.  Last month, the Yugoslavian he appointed chairwoman of
the FDIC he appointed published a video begging the public to “please,
keep your money in a…bank.”  The Michigan legislature just shut down
this week to avoid getting shot by protestors armed with military
rifles, encouraged by the President.

Some wag quipped that it’s like having the 1918 flu, the 1929 stock
market crash, and Warren G. Harding’s presidential incompetence all at
once.

This is not normal.

It’s hard to predict what will happen.  Right now, the chance of any
kind of rare event is significantly increased because of the covid
pandemic, even — perhaps especially — in the US.  Moreover, events
involving chaos and discord are especially favored.

So the chance of a US collapse is higher this year than its average
1%.  Let’s say it’s 20%.

I don’t venture to guess what a US collapse looks like.  Typically
things like famines and plagues don’t directly topple governments or
end cultures; they undermine their economic strength and political
legitimacy, making it easier for other forces to assert themselves.

Forces? What other forces might assert themselves?
--------------------------------------------------

But what groups might be players?  Recent new mass movements within
the US include the Tea Party and Occupy, but the military (3.2 million
employees of the US DoD) is in a better position to take over if the
civil state fails.  (The US police force is deliberately fragmented to
reduce the chance of this; so is the military, but much less so.)
Both the Tea Party and Occupy support positions with broad-based
popular support.

The Mormons number some 6.6 million in the US, far more than the
military, and have always planned to take over government in the US if
given the opportunity, in order to build a utopian society they call
“Zion”.  Economically and organizationally, they are well-prepared for
hard times, and if there is a famine, the Mormons may be especially
well prepared, because each family is required to store a three
months’ supply of food, water, and other essentials, a practice known
as Family Home Storage.  Mormon communities in Mexico have resisted
the incursions of drug gangs with some success.  I think it’s unlikely
that the Mormons’ dormant plans to assume temporal power will be put
into motion unless society is in frank collapse, because I don’t think
they have either the firepower or the moral force to effectively
maintain control.

Drug gangs in the US already have functional apparatus for projection
of force and have geographically widespread networks and functional
countermeasures against the police, and over the border in Mexico have
achieved substantial, though incomplete, independence from the Mexican
state.  However, drug gangs generally lack broad-based support in the
population in the US, unlike in Mexico, and suffer from serious
prejudice, much of which is racist in nature and thus not easily
overcome by a change of circumstances.

Many [large companies in the US][0] have substantial material
resources, well-exercised command hierarchies, committed workforces,
and in many cases continuity-of-business plans for disasters.  A few
even have existing security forces.  It’s plausible to think that
Walmart (2.2 million employees), Amazon (647k employees), CVS (295k
employees), AT&T (254k employees), Ford (199k employees), or Alphabet
(99k employees) might be able to take on the burden of protecting
their assets and employees without a functioning government.  Walmart
might have a hard time due to its [low profit margins][1]
(US$3k/employee), but Amazon (US$15k), AT&T (US$76k), or Ford (US$18k)
might be able to take the hit without collapsing; Alphabet (US$311k
profit per employee) easily could, and indeed Alphabet has often come
under fire for providing public services like food, laundry, and
transportation to its employees.  (CVS is currently losing money.)

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_largest_companies_in_the_United_States_by_revenue
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_largest_companies_by_revenue

Alphabet is in a unique position to defend itself from security
threats, since no potential foe can operate without its services at
present, leaving them exposed to intelligence gathering.

There are another several dozen companies in the US with over 100k
employees: Accenture (515k), Kroger (453k), Home Depot (413k),
Berkshire (though that’s a conglomerate) (389k), IBM (381k), UPS
(365k), FedEx (359k), the USPS (500+k), and so on.  Large defense
contractors include GE (283k), Boeing (153k), Honeywell (115k),
Lockheed (102k), General Dynamics (101k), and Northrop (83k).  Other
telecoms include Comcast (184k), Verizon (145k), and Charter (99k); I
mention these because availability of telecommunication is crucial to
viability of any geographically distributed organization.

It’s easy to imagine a consortium of these big companies entering into
a security cooperation arrangement with one another in order to be
able to continue operating, and big defense contractors can probably
count on support from any such consortium.
