Plaster of Paris is easily formed at room temperature, nontoxic, and
somewhat refractory, withstanding temperatures up to
[1200°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plaster_mold_casting); it melts
(or perhaps releases vitriol) at 1460°.  But it doesn't insulate
against heat extremely well, and it weakens somewhat when heated
enough to start dehydrating again, though then [it reputedly
strengthens above
800°](http://www.sciencemadness.org/talk/viewthread.php?tid=79078);
[it has a bad reputation for use in forging
iron](https://www.iforgeiron.com/topic/54424-is-plaster-of-paris-mixed-with-sand-a-good-liner-for-a-forge/),
because while it will survive up to 1200°, it slowly degrades at
iron-forging temperatures.  [NIST wrote about the various stages of
alabaster calcination in the
1940s](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/jres/27/jresv27n2p191_A1b.pdf).

Fired clay and portland-cement concrete can be foamed — aerated with
bubbles — to improve their insulation capabilities, make them more
resistant to crack propagation, and reduce their weight, at the
expense of strength.  I haven't heard of anyone doing the same thing
with plaster of Paris or lime cement.

There's a special-effects material described as "aerated plaster"
called
[Gypsnow](https://www.thomasfx.com/Aerated-Plaster-Gypsnow-50-lbs_p_8838.html):
it expands rapidly when wet; remains soft; absorbs impacts.  "Place
3.7 liters or 125 oz of water into a 5 gallon plastic bucket.  Add 10
lbs of Gypsnow and mix with an electric drill, pour the mixture into a
lined plastic form and after about an hour you can remove the item."
It claims that this is "aerated" but to me it sounds like maybe it has
styrofoam or some hygroscopic polymer in it.

Mixing expanded perlite or, better, expanded vermiculite into the
plaster would surely work.  But I think they are less refractory than
the plaster itself.

[WP says vermiculite bonded with vaguely specified adhesives including
sodium silicate is good to
1150°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vermiculite#Commercial_uses).
[It says perlite is only good to
850°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perlite).  Abandoned US patent
application
[US20160339606A1](https://patents.google.com/patent/US20160339606A1/en)
describes trying to reinforce plaster of Paris with graphite and
"cenospheres" (making the plaster a syntactic foam; for example, of
vermiculite) so it will retain more strength for use in molding
high-temperature (310+°) thermoplastics.  (The patent application
pointed out that once you've used it in molding you can wash it out
with water, since the plaster becomes water-"soluble" again at the
casting temperatures.)

The standard way to foam fired clay is to mix it with sawdust, coffee
grounds, used yerba mate, or a similar granular material that will
burn off in the kiln.  This might work with alabaster plaster too.

Fired-porous-clay kitty litter is another possible aggregate, similar
to vermiculite but denser.

Ttk Ciar suggests mixing a low-boiling-point material into the mix,
such as isopropanol, so that it will form bubbles when heating.  Maybe
a baking powder would work well.
