One of the things I've been wanting to do is to make an autonomous
personal computing device, since one doesn't seem to be forthcoming
from the economy.  It seems likely the easiest way to do this is to
get an existing device with the right peripherals (power, input, and
output), remove its CPU and RAM, and implant a new microcontroller.

Scientific calculators seem particularly promising here, but I should
probably start with something easier, like a large four-banger.  See
[the note on screens](screens.md) for some details.

The *most* interesting possibility here is probably a cellphone, maybe
a flip phone for lower battery usage — these tend to have low-power
sunlight-readable screens, rechargeable batteries, USB connections,
usable keyboards, speakers, and microphones, as well as some radio
stuff.  Old Nokia displays in particular are SPI and so relatively
easy to connect up to (easier than directly driving an LCD), though
you suffer some display latency as a result, and they only use a
couple of microwatts.  A broken Nokia 1110 goes for AR$500 (US$4) on
MercadoLibre; a lot containing a 3200, a 9300, and a 2651 go for
AR$1600 (US$10); a lot containing eight broken cellphones from that
epoch, including two QWERTY phones, goes for AR$2000 (US$14); a broken
QWERTY Nokia Asha 303 goes for AR$900 (US$7).  (The key words on
Mercado Libre are [nokia reparar].)  But this is probably a much more
advanced project.

I also have a solar garden light that seems like an appealing
possibility, though perhaps to dissect for parts; see [Garden Light
Panel](garden-light-panel.md) for details.
