How would an advanced alien civilization design screws or similar
fasteners?

Four improvements in particular occur to me: bayonet connections,
two-quarters threads, hollow threads, and positive screwdriver
coupling.

Bayonet connections and two-quarters threads
--------------------------------------------

Bayonet connections like those used for camera lenses, BNC cables,
fluorescent light starters, US childproof pill bottles,
and some kinds of lightbulbs (the English
standard) are far superior to screws in most cases, though they do
require a spring.

I understand that some barrels use threads that run around only one
quarter of the barrel, leave a slot for one quarter of the barrel, run
around another quarter of the barrel, then leave a slot for the final
quarter.  So, by rotating the barrel to the position where the threads
do not engage, you can just insert it translationally, then screw it a
quarter-turn to lock it into place.  This scheme also allows
fractional numbers of starts and variable mechanical advantage,
similar to bayonet connections, and of course you can use it with
larger numbers of starts as well.

By adding a stop at the end of the quarter-turn rotation, as in
bayonet connections, you can prevent the screw from being turned too
far, which will weaken the connection.

If there is a bit of waviness to the thread, an energy barrier can be
provided which will make the screw resistant to coming out during
impact or vibration; it must rotate a significant amount before the
energy gradient tends toward screwing out, as it always does in a
conventional screw, rather than back in.  This undulation must come
out of the clearance between the inner and outer threads, so it may be
necessary to increase the thread spacing to permit it.

By using different thread pitches at different positions along a
tapped hole that joins two or more pieces, you can cause the screw to
squeeze them apart or, more promisingly, together, by an amount
determined by the *difference* between the thread pitches.
Conventional bolted joints depend on the screw head and the nut
bearing against the tapped material for this, but if the hole is long,
the screw threads can engage more material, thus producing a joint
stronger against pullout.  This also eliminates the need for a screw
head in many applications, allowing the use of a headless screw
similar to a grub screw.

Hollow threads around a smooth shank
------------------------------------

A conventional screw is only stretched in three areas: any shanks
where threads are absent; near its head; and near each place where it
passes through a gap between two parts.  This purely local stretching
makes for maximal rigidity, and consequently maximal fragility to
impacts.  If this is not desirable, one approach is to leave a long
unthreaded shank between the threads needed to provide enough
engagement to prevent pullout, in either the screw or the hole or,
ideally, both.  A better tradeoff can be provided in many applications
by making the threads at each end a hollow cylinder maintained in
*compression*, free to slide along an internal unthreaded shank or
tension rod which is welded to the thread-covered pipes at each end of
the fastener.  (So they're only sliding to the extent that either the
threads or the rod are deforming.)  This may reduce the screw's
tensile strength somewhat, because the shank is narrower than it would
otherwise be — although the thread roots are no longer available as
crack-initiation stress risers.  But it increases the impact
resistance of the joint, because the screw can extend further before
breaking, so more energy is needed to break it.

Positive screwdriver coupling
-----------------------------

Positive screwdriver coupling might involve a ball bearing that pops
out of the side of a square-drive screwdriver to engage a cavity in
the screw head, with a shim that slides into place inside the
screwdriver to lock the ball bearing in place.  A simpler design uses
an L-shaped screwdriver blade half the width of the screwdriver and a
shim that slides in behind it to push the bottom of the L into a slot
in the screw head.
