The [Baghdad Battery][0] was not used for electroplating, but
Mythbusters has convincingly shown that it could have been: ten
similar copper-iron cells with lemon-juice electrolyte produced a
total of four volts and successfully electroplated a token.

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baghdad_Battery

I wonder if particular applications of electrochemistry were actually
used but not understood.  For example, in, I think, Huckleberry Finn,
which is full of folk beliefs about such things, a character is at one
point faced with the problem of what to do about a counterfeit
quarter, which had worn and was showing the copper around the edge.
So they put the coin inside a baked potato overnight, which restores
the silver appearance to the edge.  Huckleberry Finn was published in
1884 but purports to describe the beliefs and folkways of people in
Mark Twain’s childhood around 1840.

Silver’s [standard electrode potential][1] is +0.7996 V, while
copper’s is +0.520 V.  Alkali metals and alkaline earth metals, which
are the most enthusiastic about giving up their electrons, have among
the most negative standard electrode potential, so this means that, in
a copper-silver circuit, copper has a slight potential to give up
electrons to the electrolyte and oxidize, dissolving copper cations
into the potato, while silver would tend to acquire electrons from
solution and be reduced.  This calculation is confirmed by the
existence of the “red plague”: partly-silver-plated copper conductors
exposed to moisture form red cuprous oxide through galvanic corrosion,
rather than the silver anodically protecting the copper.  This is
unfortunately the reverse of the mass flow direction that would be
required for the counterfeit-quarter trick to work.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_electrode_potential_(data_page)

The other [metals known to the ancients][2] were lead (-0.126 V), gold
(+1.52 V, but I think not actually usable), iron (-0.44 V), tin (-0.13
V), mercury (+0.85 V), and, in India, zinc (-0.7618 V, or -1.199 V as
zincate).  Among other significant battery electrode materials, carbon
(whose electrode potentials are, I think, irrelevant) and air (oxygen?
+0.401 V?) were also known.  Although the insulators litharge and
minium were known, lead dioxide was not.

(In modern lead-acid batteries, the lead dioxide is formed
electrolytically by the sulfate electrolyte, but of course this
requires an external voltage source.)

[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_chemical_element_discoveries

Of these the champions on the positive side are mercury and silver,
while the champions on the negative side are iron and zinc.  This
suggests the possibility of constructing a battery with some 1.8 volts
per cell, almost the same as modern batteries, out of ancient metals,
or something like a lead-acid battery, but using a different
electrolyte, out of ancient materials.  It would probably be more
practical, though, to use plentiful copper, rather than precious
mercury and silver, despite the rather miserable voltages available.

Gold probably *does* work
-------------------------

Above I said I didn’t think gold would work, thinking it would be too
inert to interact with electrolytes.  But gold here wouldn’t be the
electrode that would need to dissolve, so Bernd Jendrissek tried some
gold-plated copper contacts along the edge of an old SIMM with a paper
towel soaked with salty vinegar and a copper wire on the other side of
the paper towel, getting 0.3 V and a few microamps.  So, if
Jendrissek’s report is correct, it seems that gold *does* work.
