In [Muriate Thermal Mass] I did some basic evaluation of the
reversible hydration of the dihydrate of muriate of lime to the
hexahydrate as a way to store up heat.

[Muriate Thermal Mass]: muriate-thermal-mass.md

I concluded that it was a very attractive alternative to the
miraculous salt of Glauber for domestic space heating applications,
because although it needs to be heated to 45.5° to recharge it, by my
calculations it holds 408 kJ/kg of heat energy and can produce
temperature rises of well over 100°; and it’s considerably more
flexible in when it releases that heat, instead of trying to release
it all the time and needing to be somewhat restrained by thick thermal
insulation.

However, I now conclude that I had only begun to scratch the surface
of the amazing possibilities of such systems; the [Cromer cycle] is
just the beginning.

[Cromer cycle]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cromer_cycle

It may be that all of this is irrelevant now that photovoltaic panels
are becoming so cheap, with module prices down to 15¢ per peak watt,
that collecting the large amounts of solar heat that make these things
attractive is actually more expensive than just storing energy in
batteries.  I suspect not, though; more exploration of this theme
below.

Heating
-------

In [Muriate Thermal Mass] I described the use of muriate of lime a
desiccant for heating in the following process, which turns out to be
well-known:

1. Heat the desiccant to regenerate it, driving off water vapor, for
   example with sunlight.
2. Store the dry desiccant at ambient temperature
   until it is desired to heat, for example,
   your floor, your blanket, the air in your house, or some hot water.
3. Add water to the dry desiccant to produce the desired heat, which
   can be produced either at the point where it’s desired, or
   transferred using some kind of liquid coolant.  Using an efficient
   heat exchanger such as a countercurrent recuperator or pebble-bed
   regenerative heat exchanger can make the heat transfer almost
   complete.
4. Store the spent desiccant until heat is available to regenerate it,
   for example from sunlight.

By itself this process can produce only a limited range of
temperatures — with muriate of lime my simplified calculation in
[Muriate Thermal Mass] estimates a temperature rise of just under
200°, but other desiccants may not perform so spectacularly, and I
suspect that even muriate of lime would require high pressure in
step #3 to achieve this, since otherwise the water will volatilize.

However, a cascaded heating cycle can achieve higher temperatures, as
follows:

1. As above.
2. As above.
3. As above, but instead of transferring the heat directly to the
   desired location, transfer it to more ambient-temperature dry
   desiccant and, separately, ambient-temperature water.
4. Repeat step 3 one or more additional times, but using the now-hot
   desiccant and water to reach even higher temperatures.  On the last
   repetition, transfer the heat to the desired location.
5. Store the spent desiccant from all stages until heat is available.

If there were no heat losses and the absorption reactions were equally
exothermic at all temperatures, this would give you unlimited
temperatures, but neither of those is true.

But heating is just the beginning.

Cooling
-------

Refrigeration is monumentally important, historically.  The
introduction of refrigerated cadaver ships is what made Argentina the
richest country in the world for a shining few decades, since suddenly
we could export our virtually unlimited supply of cow corpses to
Europe.  Lee Kuan Yew credits refrigeration, specifically air
conditioning, for making it possible for Singapore to develop
economically:

> Question: Anything else besides multicultural tolerance that enabled
> Singapore’s success?
>
> Answer: Air conditioning. Air conditioning was a most important
> invention for us, perhaps one of the signal inventions of
> history. It changed the nature of civilization by making development
> possible in the tropics.
>
> Without air conditioning you can work only in the cool early-morning
> hours or at dusk. The first thing I did upon becoming prime minister
> was to install air conditioners in buildings where the civil service
> worked.  This was key to public efficiency.

A simple air conditioning cycle is as follows:

1. Heat the desiccant to regenerate it, as before.
2. Allow the dry desiccant to cool to outdoor temperature, then store
   it that way if desired.  If necessary, rapid cooling can be
   achieved through either a heat exchanger with outdoor air or
   through direct contact with closed-cycle dry air which is itself
   cooled by a heat exchanger with outdoor air.
3. Pass indoor air over the ambient-temperature desiccant to eliminate
   its humidity, though this warms it up.
4. Evaporate water into the warm, dry air to restore its humidity and
   cool it to a lower temperature than before; vent this cold air into
   the indoor space.
5. Store the spent desiccant until regeneration energy is available,
   if necessary.

Optionally, after step 3, you can cool the dried, warm air by running
it through a heat exchanger with outdoor air.  This improves the
efficiency of the system.  As with the heating cycle, you can improve
the system’s temperature range by cascading the reaction, cooling the
air (and dry desiccant) through two or more stages.

Several different kinds of mass-exchange contact between the desiccant
and the air are feasible: liquid desiccant can be sprayed into an air
column or a fountain, or pumped over pads of excelsior, as in a
traditional swamp cooler, or air can be bubbled through it; a solid
desiccant can be held in granular or foam form in a rotating wheel, or
in a packed bed, or stuck to the surface of many flat plates in a
sealed box or boxes, which may or may not double as solar thermal
collectors.

This is a perfectly orthodox desiccant refrigeration system.  It can
be simplified to an outdoor evaporator and a pair of exposed fountains
in an indoor space, one of water and one of desiccant, though this may
be more advisable for oil of lime than for, say, oil of vitriol.  In
general all the options for contact with liquid desiccant are also
options for contact with liquid water.

It can be used as well for refrigeration and even freezing of food or
water, and water ice may be a denser and cheaper way to store cold
until it is needed than as dry desiccant; water ice is 333.55 kJ/kg.
Depending on the efficiencies of the cycle, though, it’s entirely
plausible that storage of energy in the form of some desiccants might
be an even denser way to prepare for the need for cooling than water
ice, and it certainly has a better shelf life and more flexibility.

Interestingly, brine of muriate of lime is commonly used in industrial
refrigeration as a coolant
rather than a desiccant — by virtue of remaining liquid down to
-50° it permits the transport of a whole lot of cold in a very small
pipe.

Dehumidifying
-------------

In addition to the above-mentioned heating and cooling applications,
stored dry desiccant can of course be used to dehumidify indoor air
simply by passing the air over it.  And of course if you can heat up
water, as explained above under “Heating”, you can humidify as well by
passing air over the heated water.

Dehydration sounds like an extremely niche use (raw-food vegans and
a few other people have 500-watt home dehydrators), but I think it isn’t;
it just hasn’t been available at a low enough price previously.
Consider the Earthship’s list of six basic human needs satisfied by
architecture: energy, garbage, sewage, shelter, water, and food.
Dehydration is directly applicable to three of those basic human
needs: garbage, sewage, and food.

Garbage and sewage are mostly problems because they rot and stink and
carry pathogens.

(Garbage is a more complex problem with many aspects, though: used
motor oil, radium paint, nickel-cadmium batteries, demolition debris,
linseed-oil-soaked rags, and so on; but food waste in particular, like
these chicken bones I have here, is mostly a problem for those three
reasons.  And the physical volume of non-construction non-food garbage
can be kept pretty minimal, like, cubic meters per person per year, or
less.  So I’m focusing here on food waste as the central core of the
garbage problem.)

At Burning Man we deal with food waste first of all by dehydrating it,
after which we can burn it or just store it in its inert dry state
until it’s time to carry it away.  There, it’s easy to dehydrate
things: you put them in one of those plastic netting bags they sell
oranges in and hang them out in the sun and wind.

Abundant desiccant regeneration capabiity makes it possible to
dehydrate food waste thus even in humid climates.

And similarly for sewage.  At Burning Man, we just copped out and used
chemical toilets, and at a local ecovillage here they used to use
potash.  Piss they would dilute with water and use as fertilizer, but
shit they would pickle with wood ash from the cooking fires.
Eventually, they switched to composting toilets, and getting those to
work with aerobic mesophilic rotting instead of the usual noxious kind
is a matter of partial dehydration: you cover your shit in the bucket
with dry leaves, which also cut down on the relative nitrogen content,
which gives you better rotting.  Civilized people don’t have dry
leaves, so instead they use sawdust or coir or something in their
composting toilets.

But, if you have ample desiccant capacity, you can use that to arrest
decay completely, and then you can either burn the remains or you can
bake them to kill all the pathogens and then use them as safe manure.

In the food category, there are a lot of foods that can be preserved
for longer periods of time by dehydration than by refrigeration,
although the change in flavor may be agreeable or disagreeable.
Outside of the former Tawantinsuyu, food dehydration is usually done
hot, which also changes the flavor of the food; in particular,
dehydrated eggs are made by a desugaring and flash-spray-drying
process that requires significant amounts of equipment and chemistry
to replicate.  Freeze-dried food in, for example, the US, is merely a
novelty: Astronaut Ice Cream, etc.  The tradition of chuño from
Tawantinsuyu is unknown.  And freeze-drying also changes the flavor of
food, mostly through changes to mouthfeel, though chuño also owes its
flavor to a fungus that grows during the process.

I think that food preservation by desiccant drying should be feasible
at low temperatures, and might offer possibilities for food
preservation with much less impact on flavor.

Thus a stored desiccant is a sort of all-purpose indoor climate
control resource, capable of blowing hot or cold, like Aesop’s
traveller in the satyr’s cave.

But wait!  Don’t touch that dial!  There’s more!

Water harvesting
----------------

Water supplies are a major concern for the humans’ survival in many
places, to say nothing of their ability to farm.  But if you can
dehumidify by sucking water out of the air into a desiccant — and the
equilibrium relative humidity for some of these desiccants is very low
indeed — then you can recondense that water when you regenerate the
desiccant, particularly if you can chill a sort of cold trap to help
the water recondense.

This allows you, in theory, to harvest an amount of water limited only
by the available low-grade heat energy (solar or otherwise) and the
amount of humidity in the air you can lure into the moisture
vaporators of your moisture farm.

Alternative desiccants
----------------------

Although in the above I chiefly referred to the properties of the
muriate of lime, many other possible desiccants exist and could be
thus applied, including alabaster, amorphous mesoporous magnesite,
zeolites, silica hydrogel, ferric chloride, polyacrylate of sodium,
pearl-ash, salt, sugar, silica aerogel, chloride of zinc, oil of
vitriol, activated charcoal, soda-ash, lye, the bromide or muriate or
nitrate of lithia, quicklime, oxide of phosphorus, nylon 6,
carnallite, chloride or sulfate or perchlorate of magnesia,
waterglass, infusorial earth, cellulose-rich waste plant material such
as sawdust and straw, porous dehydrogenated hydroxide of alumium,
fired clay ceramic, *unfired* clays, other desiccants, and mixtures of
the above.

Different desiccants have different tradeoffs, and some may not be
well suited to some uses; for example, perchlorate of magnesia must be
regenerated under vacuum, quicklime must be regenerated at the
inconveniently high temperature of 512°, and the hydration of
alabaster only produces a temperature rise of some 60° or less.  It’s
unlikely that muriate of lime is the optimal choice, but I haven’t
investigated the tradeoffs thoroughly.

Muriate of lime can work as an aqueous solution, avoiding the massive
inconvenience of your lovely pebble bed deliquescing into a sticky,
solid, impermeable lump, but I suspect that a porous solid mass of
alabaster may have even better heat transfer properties than the
aqueous solution of muriate of lime.  And alabaster doesn’t
deliquesce; at worst it may crack a bit.  As explained in [Plaster
Foam](plaster-foam.md), I got a nice porous alabaster biscuit by
mixing calcined powdered alabaster with baking powder and baking it in
a tin in an ordinary oven.

One of the chief figures of merit here is the price — either per joule
or per kg of water absorbed.  Other relevant quantitative information
includes the minimal relative humidity the desiccant can reach, the
temperature needed to regenerate it, the maximum temperature rise it
can produce, its water capacity, and its energy capacity.  Relevant
qualitative information includes whether it is solid or liquid, its
viscosity if liquid, its tendency to clump if solid (fixable in some
cases with larnite or similar substances), and its hazards if spilled
or inhaled.

But let’s look at prices first.

Muriate of lime, or oil of lime, has been one of the chief desiccants
used for centuries, and it is relatively cheap — US$1.60/kg here in
Argentina, for example, as I noted in Dercuano.  A few other
candidates approach or excel this price.  Slaked lime sells for
US$0.12/kg at retail here, and alabaster as the hemihydrate for about
US$0.40/kg, and the [USGS gives its wholesale price][alabaster] as
about US$8/tonne, thus US$0.008/kg, while giving the various [potassa]
products including pearl-ash as closer to US$800/tonne (US$0.80/kg) as
fertilizer, and [soda-ash] as US$150/tonne (US$0.15/kg).  Lime is
calcined from [limestone], which the USGS lumps with crushed stone in
general at US$12/tonne (US$0.012/kg), but the calcining and slaking
process is a significant cost by comparison.  Raw natural [zeolites]
have their wholesale price given as US$50–300/tonne
(US$0.05-US$0.30/kg), various [clays] as US$10–140/tonne
(US$0.01–0.14/kg), and [infusorial earth] US$310/tonne (US$0.34/kg).
The USGS report on [magnesia] gives no explicit price but it seems to
be about US$0.70/kg.  For [rock salt] they say US$60/tonne
(US$0.06/kg).

[alabaster]: library/mcs2020-gypsum.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-gypsum.pdf"
[potassa]: library/mcs2020-potash.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-potash.pdf"
[soda-ash]: library/mcs2020-soda-ash.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-soda-ash.pdf"
[limestone]: library/mcs2020-stone-crushed.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-stone-crushed.pdf"
[zeolites]: library/mcs2020-zeolites.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-zeolites.pdf"
[clays]: library/mcs2020-clays.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-clays.pdf"
[infusorial earth]: library/mcs2020-diatomite.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-diatomite.pdf"
[magnesia]: library/mcs2020-magnesium-compounds.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-magnesium-compounds.pdf"
[rock salt]: library/mcs2020-salt.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-salt.pdf"

Waste plant material is often free or of negative cost, but often must
be treated to stop fire and rot.

These bulk minerals, except for pearl-ash and magnesia, have wholesale
prices in the two orders of magnitude of US$0.005-US$0.5/kg.  Probably
most industrially-produced materials are unable to approach that
range, though perhaps a few, such as lye, oil of vitriol, and muriate
of lime might make it.

L29Ah was kind enough to point out that
[the random Russian website opt6.ru][0] offers a tonne of 99.2%-pure
muriate of lime for 21000 rubles; [a ruble is presently US$0.01294][1]
reportedly, so that’s US$272/tonne or US$0.272/kg.
If this price is correct, it’s toward the
high end of the price per kg of the cheap desiccants, and 34× the
price of calcined alabaster, but it’s still kind of within the range.

Using the 408 kJ/kg number from [Muriate of Lime], this price works
out to 1.5 MJ/$, 666 nanodollars per joule.

[0]: https://opt6.ru/products/khloristyy_kaltsiy_1000_kg/
[1]: https://www.xe.com/currencyconverter/convert/?Amount=1&From=RUB&To=USD

Alabaster is especially tempting due to its 34 times lower price per
mass, and also because it doesn’t glom together into a sticky mass
when you regenerate it, though it can when you hydrate it.

Alabaster’s molar mass is 136.14 g/mol anhydrous, 145.15 g/mol as
hemihydrate, and 172.172 g/mol as dihydrate.  Converting the dihydrate
back to the hemihydrate is more difficult than with muriate of lime,
requiring 100°–150°, and conversion back to the anhydrous form
requires 180°.  Upon hydration it can reportedly reach 60°.  The key
datum I lack here for comparison is the enthalpy of formation of the
different hydrated forms.

Quicklime is notorious for producing enough heat to boil water when
rehydrated, and it’s very nearly as cheap as alabaster.  However,
regenerating it requires inconveniently high temperatures, and it’s
lethally caustic.

[Farulla et al.] characterize “thermochemical thermal energy storage”
systems like these as storing 120–250 kWh/t, or 430–900 kJ/kg in SI
units, much higher than sensible-heat thermal energy storage systems
at 10–50 kWh/t (36–180 kJ/kg); but it claims TCTESs also cost
€8–100/kWh (2500–32000 nanodollars per joule), far more than the
€0.1-10/kWh (32–3200 n$/J) of sensible TES, identifying these high
capital costs as a key reason for TCTES’s non-adoption.

[Farulla et al.]: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/9/3142/htm "A Review of Thermochemical Energy Storage Systems for Power Grid Support, March 2020, Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 3142; doi:10.3390/app10093142"

It seems plausible that one of the materials described above could
deliver low capital costs, in the range of sensible TES costs or even
lower.  Farulla et al. are not unaware of these materials, and they
even survey a number of published results from prototypes using them,
as well as results designed for both heating and cooling.  However, it
seems that a great deal of research in the field has been focused on
somewhat more exotic and therefore costly materials such as bromide of
strontia, synthetic zeolites, muriate of lithia or baryta, and so on.
I need to finish reading their paper.

Efficiency and comparison with electrical alternatives
------------------------------------------------------

Wholesale photovoltaic modules at 15¢ per peak watt at 20% capacity
factor cost US$0.75 per average watt, which is 86.4 kJ per day.  At a
6% annual discount rate an average watt amounts to 30.6 net present MJ
in the first year, 59.3 in the first two years, 135 in the first five
years, 235 MJ in the first ten years, 362 MJ in the first 20, 487 MJ
in the first 50, asymptoting to 509.7 MJ at infinite time.  (That is,
although it produces 30.6 MJ per year, the 1580 MJ it produces in its
first 50 years are only worth 487 present MJ to us at a 6% discount
rate.)  So photovoltaic modules work out to 680 MJ per US$ (at 6%
APY).

If your thermochemical energy storage system can *store* 10 MJ per
US$, which Farulla *et al.* say that current TCES systems don’t come
close to, how does that compare?  How about the 2500–32000 nanodollars
per joule (0.03–0.4 MJ/$, US$2.50–32/MJ) reported by Farulla *et al.*?
How do you measure energy storage against energy generation?

Well, they aren’t really commensurable.  No amount of photovoltaic
modules on your roof will allow you to run the air conditioner at
night, and no amount of calcium chloride will heat or cool your house
if it’s all fully hydrated; the TCES as such trades off against
batteries, not solar panels.  And it doesn’t trade off against all
uses of batteries.  And it also trades off somewhat against other
climate control systems like vapor-compression refrigerators.

But when I was looking at balcony batteries a couple of years ago in
Dercuano, lead-acid batteries cost US$23-73/MJ, which I don’t think
has changed much (though possibly lithium-ion will surpass them in a
year or two).  In crude terms this is about 1 to 700 times more
expensive than a TCES, depending on whether you rely on Farulla *et
al.*’s reports on existing prototype systems or my optimistic
projections from possibly impractical but very cheap desiccant
materials.  But that doesn’t include the cost of the vapor-compression
air conditioning system itself.

Energy storage is strongly complementary, in the economic sense, to
solar energy, and this is responsible for much of the interest in
thermal energy storage systems in recent years.  The cheaper TES is,
the more valuable solar modules become; the cheaper solar modules
become, the more valuable TES is.  TES can’t fulfill all of the energy
storage needs for intermittent solar and wind energy, because it has
very poor round-trip efficiency for mechanical energy, light, and so
on.  So batteries will still be needed.

(Still, for small low-power things like clocks and cellphones, TES
might be a useful backup power source, perhaps using a thermoelectric
generator or a Stirling engine.)

However, it’s very likely that you can get more solar energy for your
TES by gathering solar thermal energy than by gathering electrical
energy with solar cells with an efficiency of 16% or 21%.  And you can
do it with collectors that are cheaper than photovoltaic modules,
which still cost US$0.15 per peak watt.  For example, you can use 1 m
× 1 m × 19 mm boxes made of thin styrofoam, open at the top (one of
the large faces), painted black on the inside, with plastic wrap
wrapped around them to let light in, and smeared with a “chemical
sunscreen” to slow UV damage.  The airspace within permits air to be
blown through there, using a couple of holes in the back of the box,
to harvest the heat.  I think these will be about 30% efficient.  The
material would cost about US$20 for a 4’×8’ sheet (3.0 m² in
non-medieval units), so that’s about 1000W peak for US$20, US$0.02 per
peak watt.

(Rather than plastic wrap, you might be able to use UV-blocking
polyester film intended for outdoor use.)

So solar collectors for a TES can probably be about a factor of 5 or
10 cheaper than photovoltaic modules.

Scaling down
------------

One of the great advantages of thermochemical energy storage is that
you don’t need to insulate it.  This, in turn, means that you can
scale it down from building-sized systems to very small systems, and
the stored energy has a shelf life of potentially years; “self-heating
cans” have used muriate of lime for many years, for example.

You could thus scale these systems down to a wearable size, providing
personal climate control.

Innovation considerations
-------------------------

If this is such an advantageous technology, why hasn’t it been adopted
previously?  The humans have used fire to warm themselves for at least
a million years.  The calcining of alabaster goes back at least to Old
Kingdom Egypt, the calcining of lime even further, to the Neolithic,
before Çatal Höyük.  Tubes of dried clay for guiding air date back, I
think, at least to the beginning of iron smelting in the Hittite
empire 4000 years ago.  Evaporative cooling via the qanat goes back
3000 years in Iran.  Texts [purporting to be from 1200 years ago, by
Jabir ibn Hayyan (“Geber”), described the “spirits of salt”][2], and
undoubtedly observed their action on chalk, producing bubbling and oil
of lime.  Émilie du Châtelet’s discovery of energy was published in
1756, after Leibniz’s pioneering efforts in the 1670s and 1680s.
Thermodynamics was well-developed in the 19th century.  Solvay began
mass production of soda ash, with a byproduct of muriate of lime, in
1864.  Gibbs described his “available energy” in 1873.  Refrigeration
and air conditioning was developed in the late 1800s, and the hazards
of leaks of toxic and caustic refrigerants were such a major issue
that Einstein and Szílárd patented their ammonia-absorption
refrigerator without moving parts in 1930, a variant of the 1922
Munters–von Platen design, and Electrolux immediately put it into
production; the same year, Midgley famously snuffed a candle with a
breath of dichlorodifluoromethane, which he’d developed for the same
humanitarian reasons, and which became the most popular refrigerant
for decades.  Harold Ellingham published his “Ellingham diagram” in
1944.

[2]: http://www.history-science-technology.com/articles/articles%2072.html

So the materials needed for thermochemical energy storage systems have
been not only available but abundant for centuries, if not millennia;
the theory necessary to design them for a century and a half; and they
fulfill needs that have been universal human experiences for a hundred
times longer than civilizations have existed.  So, if these systems
are so advantageous, why have they not been applied widely?

In the particular case of sewage, given the depth of mind-crippling
tabus on the subject, I don’t think we need much reason for slow
diffusion of shit-handling innovations; the US still hasn’t adopted
bidets, for example.  Squat toilets like the traditional Turkish and
Japanese designs help greatly with constipation.  The US has a huge
constipation problem.  Nevertheless, diffusion of squat toilets is
actually negative, because aping the less-functional English design is
more prestigious than using a design that works better anatomically.
Garbage suffers from similar mind-crippling tabus, but they are less
severe, and indeed garbage-handling practices have changed
dramatically and rapidly in past decades.

So, in the case of garbage, but especially in the case of food
preparation, air conditioning, and heating, I think we need a better
explanation.  There are some commercial installations using desiccant
air conditioners, dating back to the 1980s in some cases, but it is
not a widely adopted technology.  There are even a few cases of using
thermochemical energy storage for both heating and cooling in this
way, though I haven’t seen previous suggestions of using a single
thermochemical energy store for so many different purposes: space
heating, heat for cooking, air conditioning, air dehumidification,
food refrigeration, food dehydration, garbage dehydration, and sewage
dehydration.

Moreover, many of the deployed and research systems use expensive
desiccants such as lithium bromide; I can’t find any trustworthy
sources on its cost, but I doubt it approaches the US$0.27/kg price of
muriate of lime or US$0.008/kg of alabaster.  [Lithium] carbonate
costs US$13/kg and is 18.8% lithium, making the lithium cost US$69/kg.
[Bromine] costs US$2.19/kg.  Lithium bromide is 8% lithium and 92%
bromine.  This suggests a cost of US$5.50 for the lithium and US$2 for
the bromine, per kg of lithium bromide, thus US$7.50.

[Lithium]: library/mcs2020-lithium.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-lithium.pdf"
[Bromine]: library/mcs2020-bromine.pdf "https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/mcs2020-bromine.pdf"

I tentatively suggest that perhaps what I am proposing in this note
has not been tried, though I cannot imagine why not.

A complement to compressed air?  Maybe
--------------------------------------

Compressed air has been a widely used temporary storage form for
energy for over half a century; air-powered tools are common in auto
shops all over the world, and the non-electric Amish in particular
have developed quite an economy of compressing air with windmills,
shipping compressed air around in tanker cars, storing it in enormous
underground tanks, and so on, with the objective of easing their work
without becoming dependent on the “English” for electricity.

One of the disadvantages of compressed air energy storage is that,
when air is adiabatically compressed, much of the compression energy
is lost as heat rather than being stored in the compressed gas.
Another is that when room-temperature compressed air expands, it
cools, and this cooling can condense water out of it, which tends to
cause various kinds of problems in compressed-air-powered and
compressed-air-handling machinery.

The solution, in theory, is [isothermal compressed-air energy
storage][4], where the air is cooled to maintain a constant
temperature as it is being compressed, and heated back up as it is
being decompressed.

[4]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compressed_air_energy_storage#Isothermal

Doing this on a small scale is difficult, because doing it the normal
way requires access to some kind of “heat absorbing and releasing
structure” connected to a huge heat reservoir, such as a lake or the
ocean, to keep its temperature change minimal.  But phase-change and
thermochemical energy-storage systems have the possibility of
absorbing and later releasing massive amounts of heat without changing
their temperatures; thermochemical systems additionally have the
possibility of releasing the heat at a lower temperature than it was
initially provided.  This reheating not only improves the efficiency
of the energy storage device; it also avoids condensation.
