(Untested.)

Suppose you have a layer of aluminum foil or gold leaf on top of a
piece of glass and you vaporize a pinhole in the metal with an arc.
You can position the electrode that creates the arc to submicron
precision, and by controlling the energy of the arc, you can vaporize
a precisely controlled amount of the metal, creating a hole comparable
to or slightly smaller than the thickness of the foil — household
aluminum foil is about 10 μm, aluminized-mylar Doritos bags are about
1 μm, and gold leaf is about 0.1 μm.  Smaller controlled thicknesses
may be feasible if deposited onto a substrate like boPET or polyimide,
for example by vacuum coating.

Some of the vaporized metal will impact the glass, blowing air out of
the way in the process, and condense there, thus locally depositing
metal on the glass.

This provides a simple way to locally deposit a fairly precisely
controlled amount of metal onto a substrate, insulating or conductive,
with submicron positional control.  Aside from the potential utility
of marking the surface of the glass or other substrate, by repeating
the process layer by layer, you can manufacture arbitrary
three-dimensional shapes from the metal with submicron precision, and
much higher material deposition rates than are possible with
electroforming.

Doing this with noble metals such as gold, platinum, or iridium should
be possible even in air, but more reactive metals such as silver,
copper, aluminum, and iron probably require an inert-gas atmosphere,
or at least nitrogen.  Conductive oxides like those of lead or silver
might permit the use of this process for simultaneous arc deposition
and reduction in a reducing atmosphere such as acetylene, but hydrogen
contamination of the resulting metal might reduce the utility of this
approach.

Electric arcs can easily reach temperatures high enough to sublimate
even carbon, so this process can deposit even very refractory metals
like tungsten, molybdenum, or tantalum.  Moreover, by putting a little
distance between the substrate and the feedstock, very thin films can
be formed.

In most cases, though, minimizing the distance between the substrate
and the feedstock would be desirable.  One way to achieve this is to
cut channels at known locations into the surface of the substrate, say
a one-millimeter grid of 100-micron-wide channels, and pull a light
vacuum on those channels.  In that way the gas necessary to sustain
the arc in the process as described above can be employed to eliminate
the unwanted gap rather than sustaining it.

Under vacuum, instead of an arc, a high-power electron beam or focused
ion beam could instead be used to locally vaporize the feedstock, as
in e-beam etching and FIB milling.  This should permit nanometer
resolution rather than the mere submicron resolution routinely
attainable with mechanically positioned tooltips.

Of course, the localized heating of the glass substrate may also have
effects, desirable or otherwise.  If they are desirable, the optimum
“feedstock” may be a film of conducting graphene or graphite rather
than a metal.  And, [as Russ of Sarbar Multimedia points
out](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MDctYVg9pfU), you can use a laser
rather than an arc to heat the feedstock, and if the substrate is
transparent, you can place the feedstock on the opposite side of the
substrate so that the laser side of the feedstock is the one touching
the substrate.
