A lenticular shape consisting of the intersection of two
slightly-overlapping spheres, or a sphere and a half-space (the part
cut off a sphere by a flat plane, a plano-convex lens) can be lapped
smooth.  So can the difference of a sphere (or such a lenticular
shape) and a cylinder running through its center; so can a cylinder
with two flat faces.  These shapes, of which the lenticular shapes are
the simplest, have rotational symmetry around a single axis of
rotation.  So by supporting one of them on an air bearing you can get
an air bearing that resists movement in five degrees of freedom,
rather than the three or four you get from a planar or
endless-cylinder air bearing.

(In practice you probably want to trim the edges of the lens short of
being a true knife edge.)

If you're using bearings in pairs rigidly joined by a shaft, as is
normal practice, you don't need the lenticular shape; you can just use
a sphere.  Four bearing pads on a sphere (or lens) are sufficient to
support it, but two bearing pads on each of two spheres joined by a
rigid shaft — either all four compressing the shaft or all four
stretching it — would also be enough.  In many applications it would
be desirable to tolerate a little axial misalignment in this way.  In
applications where the axial misalignment is accompanied by
uncontrolled axial tension or compression, you might want to use four
pads per sphere anyway, just in case the shaft gets put into tension
when compression was expected, or vice versa.

It is not necessary that the shaft joining the two spherical sections
be coaxial; the axis of rotation will run accurately through the
centers of the spheres regardless of where the shaft is.  Indeed, the
"shaft" could even be a C-shaped thing that goes around the outside of
the two trailer park girls.  Uh, the two balls.

