Plaster of Paris is easily formed at room temperature, nontoxic, and
somewhat refractory, withstanding temperatures up to
[1200°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plaster_mold_casting); it
decomposes by releasing vitriol at 1460°.  But it doesn’t insulate
against heat extremely well, and it weakens somewhat when heated
enough to start dehydrating again, becoming easily crumbled with
the fingers.  [It reputedly
strengthens again above
800°](http://www.sciencemadness.org/talk/viewthread.php?tid=79078),
but if that’s true, it must be a process
that takes more than the few minutes I tried.
[It has a bad reputation for use in forging
iron](https://www.iforgeiron.com/topic/54424-is-plaster-of-paris-mixed-with-sand-a-good-liner-for-a-forge/),
because while it will survive up to 1200°, it slowly degrades at
iron-forging temperatures.  [NIST wrote about the various stages of
alabaster calcination in the
1940s](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/jres/27/jresv27n2p191_A1b.pdf).

Once re-calcined, the plaster remains solid (except that portion
heated to white heat, which evolves a vitriolic air), but is
enormously more fragile than before; rubbing it between fingers
produces a fine floury powder.  It also contracts slightly, producing
cracks when heating is uneven.  These are more serious problems for
larger objects, which more easily collapse under their own weight,
than for smaller ones.

Fired clay and portland-cement concrete can be foamed — aerated with
bubbles — to improve their insulation capabilities, make them more
resistant to crack propagation, and reduce their weight, at the
expense of strength.  I haven’t heard of anyone doing the same thing
with plaster of Paris or lime cement.

There’s a special-effects material described as “aerated plaster”
called
[Gypsnow](https://www.thomasfx.com/Aerated-Plaster-Gypsnow-50-lbs_p_8838.html):
it expands rapidly when wet; remains soft; absorbs impacts.  “Place
3.7 liters or 125 oz of water into a 5 gallon plastic bucket.  Add 10
lbs of Gypsnow and mix with an electric drill, pour the mixture into a
lined plastic form and after about an hour you can remove the item.”
It claims that this is “aerated” but to me it sounds like maybe it has
styrofoam or some hygroscopic polymer in it.

Mixing expanded perlite or, better, expanded vermiculite into the
plaster would surely work.  But I think they are less refractory than
the plaster itself.

[WP says vermiculite bonded with vaguely specified adhesives including
sodium silicate is good to
1150°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vermiculite#Commercial_uses).
[It says perlite is only good to
850°](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perlite).  Hydrated sodium
silicate itself will foam up like vermiculite or perlite when you heat
it, but the remaining solid material is still sodium silicate, and
retains the very low softening point of alkali silicates.  Perhaps
this is less of a problem in the vermiculite composite, where perhaps
the sodium can diffuse away into the vermiculite rather than leaving
points of contact very vulnerable to melting.

Abandoned US patent
application
[US20160339606A1](https://patents.google.com/patent/US20160339606A1/en)
describes trying to reinforce plaster of Paris with graphite and
“cenospheres” (making the plaster a syntactic foam; for example, of
vermiculite) so it will retain more strength for use in molding
high-temperature (310+°) thermoplastics.  (The patent application
pointed out that once you’ve used it in molding you can wash it out
with water, since the plaster becomes water-“soluble” again at the
casting temperatures.)

The standard way to foam fired clay is to mix it with sawdust, coffee
grounds, used yerba mate, or a similar granular material that will
burn off in the kiln.  This might work with alabaster plaster too.  I
have made a lump of plaster mixed with yerba; it is quite hard, less
dense than plain plaster, and pale green, and it seems to survive fire
a bit better than plain plaster; but I haven’t yet had the chance to
fire such an article long enough to burn out all the organics.

[Naphthalene] is reportedly used in this way to make porous grinding
wheels, boiling out at quite reasonable temperatures instead of
needing to be oxidized away like yerba mate.  A wide variety of
substances would work as alternatives; they need to survive the
plaster’s setting process in solid form — so water ice, for example,
will not work; be capable of breaking apart into granules and
remaining as separate granules, ruling out, for example, chewing gum
and candle wax; not be soluble in or reactive with water; not react
with the plaster itself, which I think might rule out, say, iodine; be
easily removable after the plaster is set, for example by heating (as
naphthalene) or dissolution with another solvent (as brimstone or
rubber in disulfuret of carbon); and, ideally, be very cheap.

[Naphthalene]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naphthalene

Other compounds with these properties include para-dichlorobenzene,
camphor, brimstone, rubber, and chlorargyrite, which last requires
ammoniated water to dissolve.  A more extensive note on some such
possibilities, though mostly water-soluble, is in [Inorganic
Burnout](inorganic-burnout.md).  Many common plastics including LDPE
are also suitable; though more expensive than the plaster itself, they
are reusable.  Brimstone has the unique advantage of being very cheap
as a petroleum waste product, and its common form melts into a thin
liquid at 115°.  However, it requires precautions against fire.

Fired-porous-clay kitty litter is another possible porous aggregate, similar
to vermiculite but denser.

Plaster muffins
---------------

Ttk Ciar suggests mixing a low-boiling-point material into the mix,
such as isopropanol, so that it will form bubbles when heating.  Maybe
a baking powder would work well, [as suggested by “Ken” in 2013, who
also suggested trying dishwashing
detergent](http://www.observationsblog.com/sciencetechnologyexperiments/plaster-of-paris-mixing-guide).
I baked such a loaf of plaster with baking powder; the top of the foam
seemed a bit spongy during baking, but the expansion seems to be less
than a factor of 2.  I turned off the oven after about 20 or 30
minutes of baking; a couple of hours later it seems to be setting
reasonably well, resembling a lava rock, so I demolded it and put it
in a plastic bag to finish setting overnight.

The cylinder is about 30 mm high and about 80 mm in diameter.

Upon being flamed with a butane torch, the foamed plaster turns first
black before turning a brighter white than originally, signaling the
presence of some off-white organic compound, maybe bitartrate of soda.
It seems to be an open-cell foam; I can blow through it, which is
probably why it didn’t expand further.  Unfortunately it also has an
aroma something like formaldehyde, so I question whether putting my
lips on it was a good idea.

It was somewhat harder the next day, and another day later a powdery
white efflorescence had formed on the surface, containing tiny soft
white needlelike crystals.  I suspect that the evaporation at the
surface of the block carried with it either the unreacted baking
powder or its reaction products.

I’d used an empty tuna can as the mold for this plaster muffin in the
oven, and I think I’d scratched its internal plastic protective layer,
perhaps while mixing the plaster with a chopstick, because there are a
couple of thin lines of rust-colored discoloration on the bottom of
the muffin.  There was also a spot of discoloration on top, which I
don’t know the source of.

As an interesting note on crack propagation, I was able to snap the
muffin in half with my hands after scoring the top and bottom surfaces
with fingernails, and then later to drive a metal wire through the
whole height of the cylinder.  No visible cracks propagated out from
the wire.

Another possible way to foam it: hydrate it with water with a lot of
dissolved gas, perhaps Priestley’s carbonated water, under pressure if
necessary.  The gas will bubble out and form a foam, but not before
the pressure is released.
